38
CHAPTER 2. BROWNIAN MOTION
central limit theorem, and we will expect normal distributions. Also, because
all of the increments are small with respect to the sum, the limit process will
have paths that are continuous. Here the limit is Bwhich we
discuss in this section.
In the Poisson case, the limit distribution will not have continuous paths
but rather will be a . The prototypical case is the Poisson process
with intensity λ. In this case, Nt denotes the number of occurrences of an
event by time t. The function t →Nt takes on nonnegative integer values
and the jumps are always of size +1. It satises the following conditions.
For each s < t, the random variable Nt −Ns has a Poisson distribution
with parameter λ(t −s).
For each s < t, the random variable Nt −Ns is independent of the
random variables Nr : 0 ≤r ≤s
We discuss this further in Section 6.2.
2.2
Multivariate normal distribution
Although the normal or Gaussian distribution is a little inconvenient in the
sense that the distribution function cannot be computed exactly, there are
many other aspects that make the distribution very convenient. In partic-
ular, when dealing with many variables, assuming a 
normal distribution makes computations tractable. In this section we will
give the basic denitions. Roughly speaking, the basic assumption is that
if (X1, , Xn, Y ) have a joint normal distribution then not only does each
variable have a normal distribution but also, the conditional distribution of
Y given X1, , Xn is normal with mean E[Y X1, , Xn] and a variance
that depends on the joint distribution but not on the observed data points.
There are a number of equivalent ways to dene a joint normal distribution.
We will use the following.
Denition A nite sequence of random variables (X1, , Xn) has a 
() (G) distribution if they are linear com-
binations of independent standard normal random variables. In other words,
if there exist independent random variables (Z1, , Zm), each N(0, 1), and
constants mj, ajk such that for j = 1, , n,
Xj = mj + aj1 Z1 + aj2 Z2 + · · · + ajm Zm
