1 The Golem of Prague
In the 16th century, the House of Habsburg controlled much of Central Europe, the
Netherlands, and Spain, as well as Spain’s colonies in the Americas. The House was maybe
the first true world power. The Sun shone always on some portion of it. Its ruler was also
Holy Roman Emperor, and his seat of power was Prague. The Emperor in the late 16th
century, Rudolph II, loved intellectual life. He invested in the arts, the sciences (including
astrology and alchemy), and mathematics, making Prague into a world center of learning
and scholarship. It is appropriate then that in this learned atmosphere arose an early robot,
the Golem of Prague.
A golem (goh-lem) is a clay robot from Jewish folklore, constructed from dust and fire
and water. It is brought to life by inscribing emet, Hebrew for “truth,” on its brow. Animated
by truth, but lacking free will, a golem always does exactly what it is told. This is lucky,
because the golem is incredibly powerful, able to withstand and accomplish more than its
creators could. However, its obedience also brings danger, as careless instructions or unex-
pected events can turn a golem against its makers. Its abundance of power is matched by its
lack of wisdom.
In some versions of the golem legend, Rabbi Judah Loew ben Bezalel sought a way to
defend the Jews of Prague. As in many parts of 16th century Central Europe, the Jews of
Prague were persecuted. Using secret techniques from the Kabbalah, Rabbi Judah was able
to build a golem, animate it with “truth,” and order it to defend the Jewish people of Prague.
Not everyone agreed with Judah’s action, fearing unintended consequences of toying with
the power of life. Ultimately Judah was forced to destroy the golem, as its combination of
extraordinary power with clumsiness eventually led to innocent deaths. Wiping away one
letter from the inscription emet to spell instead met, “death,” Rabbi Judah decommissioned
the robot.
1.1. Statistical golems
Scientists also make golems.1 Our golems rarely have physical form, but they too are
often made of clay, living in silicon as computer code. These golems are scientific models.
But these golems have real effects on the world, through the predictions they make and the
intuitions they challenge or inspire. A concern with “truth” enlivens these models, but just
like a golem or a modern robot, scientific models are neither true nor false, neither prophets
nor charlatans. Rather they are constructs engineered for some purpose. These constructs
are incredibly powerful, dutifully conducting their programmed calculations.
1
