2.3. COMPONENTS OF THE MODEL
35
doesn’t resolve the problem of providing a prior, because at the dawn of time, when N = 0,
the machine still had an initial state of information for the parameter p: a flat line specifying
equal plausibility for every possible value.
So where do priors come from? They are both engineering assumptions, chosen to help
the machine learn, and scientific assumptions, chosen to reflect what we know about a phe-
nomenon. The flat prior in Figure 2.5 is very common, but it is hardly ever the best prior.
Later chapters will focus on prior choice a lot more.
There is a school of Bayesian inference that emphasizes choosing priors based upon the
personal beliefs of the analyst.47 While this subjective Bayesian approach thrives in some
statistics and philosophy and economics programs, it is rare in the sciences. Within Bayesian
data analysis in the natural and social sciences, the prior is considered to be just part of
the model. As such it should be chosen, evaluated, and revised just like all of the other
components of the model. In practice, the subjectivist and the non-subjectivist will often
analyze data in nearly the same way.
None of this should be understood to mean that any statistical analysis is not inherently
subjective, because of course it is—lots of little subjective decisions are involved in all parts
of science. It’s just that priors and Bayesian data analysis are no more inherently subjective
than are likelihoods and the repeat sampling assumptions required for significance testing.48
Anyone who has visited a statistics help desk at a university has probably experienced this
subjectivity—statisticians do not in general exactly agree on how to analyze anything but the
simplest of problems. The fact that statistical inference uses mathematics does not imply that
there is only one reasonable or useful way to conduct an analysis. Engineering uses math as
well, but there are many ways to build a bridge.
Beyond all of the above, there’s no law mandating we use only one prior. If you don’t
have a strong argument for any particular prior, then try different ones. Because the prior is
an assumption, it should be interrogated like other assumptions: by altering it and checking
how sensitive inference is to the assumption. No one is required to swear an oath to the
assumptions of a model, and no set of assumptions deserves our obedience.
Overthinking: Prior as probability distribution. You could write the prior in the example here as:
Pr(p) =
1
1 −0 = 1.
The prior is a probability distribution for the parameter. In general, for a uniform prior from a to b, the
probability of any point in the interval is 1/(b −a). If you’re bothered by the fact that the probability
of every value of p is 1, remember that every probability distribution must sum (integrate) to 1. The
expression 1/(b −a) ensures that the area under the flat line from a to b is equal to 1. There will be
more to say about this in Chapter 4.
Rethinking: Datum or parameter? It is typical to conceive of data and parameters as completely
different kinds of entities. Data are measured and known; parameters are unknown and must be
estimated from data. Usefully, in the Bayesian framework the distinction between a datum and a
parameter is not so fundamental. Sometimes we observe a variable, but sometimes we do not. In that
case, the same distribution function applies, even though we didn’t observe the variable. As a result,
the same assumption can look like a “likelihood” or a “prior,” depending upon context, without any
change to the model. Much later in the book (Chapter 15), you’ll see how to exploit this deep identity
