46
2. SMALL WORLDS AND LARGE WORLDS
The values in p are samples from the posterior distribution. To compare to the analytical posterior:
R code
2.9
dens( p , xlim=c(0,1) )
curve( dbeta( x , W+1 , L+1 ) , lty=2 , add=TRUE )
It’s weird. But it works. I’ll explain this algorithm, the Metropolis algorithm, in Chapter 9.
2.5. Summary
This chapter introduced the conceptual mechanics of Bayesian data analysis. The target
of inference in Bayesian inference is a posterior probability distribution. Posterior probabil-
ities state the relative numbers of ways each conjectured cause of the data could have pro-
duced the data. These relative numbers indicate plausibilities of the different conjectures.
These plausibilities are updated in light of observations, a process known as Bayesian updat-
ing.
More mechanically, a Bayesian model is a composite of variables and distributional def-
initions for these variables. The probability of the data, often called the likelihood, provides
the plausibility of an observation (data), given a fixed value for the parameters. The prior
provides the plausibility of each possible value of the parameters, before accounting for the
data. The rules of probability tell us that the logical way to compute the plausibilities, after
accounting for the data, is to use Bayes’ theorem. This results in the posterior distribution.
In practice, Bayesian models are fit to data using numerical techniques, like grid approx-
imation, quadratic approximation, and Markov chain Monte Carlo. Each method imposes
different trade-offs.
2.6. Practice
Easy.
2E1. Which of the expressions below correspond to the statement: the probability of rain on Monday?
(1) Pr(rain)
(2) Pr(rain|Monday)
(3) Pr(Monday|rain)
(4) Pr(rain, Monday)/ Pr(Monday)
2E2. Which of the following statements corresponds to the expression: Pr(Monday|rain)?
(1) The probability of rain on Monday.
(2) The probability of rain, given that it is Monday.
(3) The probability that it is Monday, given that it is raining.
(4) The probability that it is Monday and that it is raining.
2E3. Which of the expressions below correspond to the statement: the probability that it is Monday,
given that it is raining?
(1) Pr(Monday|rain)
(2) Pr(rain|Monday)
(3) Pr(rain|Monday) Pr(Monday)
(4) Pr(rain|Monday) Pr(Monday)/ Pr(rain)
(5) Pr(Monday|rain) Pr(rain)/ Pr(Monday)
