10
1. THE GOLEM OF PRAGUE
about the world are not good scientific hypotheses. In that case, we should conclude that the
definition of a “good hypothesis” isn’t doing us much good. Now, nearly everyone agrees
that it is a good practice to design experiments and observations that can differentiate com-
peting hypotheses. But in many cases, the comparison must be probabilistic, a matter of
degree, not kind.17
1.2.3. Falsification is consensual. The scientific community does come to regard some hy-
potheses as false. The caloric theory of heat and the geocentric model of the universe are no
longer taught in science courses, unless it’s to teach how they were falsified. And evidence
often—but not always—has something to do with such falsification.
But falsification is always consensual, not logical. In light of the real problems of measure-
ment error and the continuous nature of natural phenomena, scientific communities argue
towards consensus about the meaning of evidence. These arguments can be messy. After the
fact, some textbooks misrepresent the history so it appears like logical falsification.18 Such
historical revisionism may hurt everyone. It may hurt scientists, by rendering it impossible
for their own work to live up to the legends that precede them. It may make science an easy
target, by promoting an easily attacked model of scientific epistemology. And it may hurt
the public, by exaggerating the definitiveness of scientific knowledge.19
1.3. Tools for golem engineering
So if attempting to mimic falsification is not a generally useful approach to statistical
methods, what are we to do? We are to model. Models can be made into testing procedures—
all statistical tests are also models20—but they can also be used to design, forecast, and argue.
Doing research benefits from the ability to produce and manipulate models, both because
scientific problems are more general than “testing” and because the pre-made golems you
maybe met in introductory statistics courses are ill-fit to many research contexts. You may
not even know which statistical model to use, unless you have a generative model in addition.
If you want to reduce your chances of wrecking Prague, then some golem engineering
know-how is needed. Make no mistake: You will wreck Prague eventually. But if you are a
good golem engineer, at least you’ll notice the destruction. And since you’ll know a lot about
how your golem works, you stand a good chance to figure out what went wrong. Then your
next golem won’t be as bad. Without the engineering training, you’re always at someone
else’s mercy.
We want to use our models for several distinct purposes: designing inquiry, extraction
information from data, and making predictions. In this book I’ve chosen to focus on tools
help with each purpose. These tools are:
(1) Bayesian data analysis
(2) Model comparison
(3) Multilevel models
(4) Graphical causal models
These tools are deeply related to one another, so it makes sense to teach them together. Un-
derstanding of these tools comes, as always, only with implementation—you can’t compre-
hend golem engineering until you do it. And so this book focuses mostly on code, how to
do things. But in the remainder of this chapter, I provide introductions to these tools.
1.3.1. Bayesian data analysis. Supposing you have some data, how should you use it to learn
about the world? There is no uniquely correct answer to this question. Lots of approaches,
