22
2. SMALL WORLDS AND LARGE WORLDS
Figure 2.2. The 64 possible paths generated by assuming the bag contains
one blue and three white marbles.
Because we believe that our shaking of the bag gives each marble a fair chance at being drawn,
regardless of which marble was drawn previously. The third layer is built in the same way,
and the full garden is shown in Figure 2.2. There are 43 = 64 possible paths in total.
As we consider each draw from the bag, some of these paths are logically eliminated.
The first draw tuned out to be
, recall, so the three white paths at the bottom of the garden
are eliminated right away. If you imagine the real data tracing out a path through the garden,
it must have passed through the one blue path near the origin. The second draw from the
bag produces
, so three of the paths forking out of the first blue marble remain. As the
data trace out a path, we know it must have passed through one of those three white paths
(after the first blue path), but we don’t know which one, because we recorded only the color
of each marble. Finally, the third draw is
. Each of the remaining three paths in the middle
layer sustain one blue path, leaving a total of three ways for the sequence
to appear,
assuming the bag contains [
]. Figure 2.3 shows the garden again, now with logically
eliminated paths grayed out. We can’t be sure which of those three paths the actual data took.
But as long as we’re considering only the possibility that the bag contains one blue and three
white marbles, we can be sure that the data took one of those three paths. Those are the only
paths consistent with both our knowledge of the bag’s contents (four marbles, white or blue)
and the data (
).
This demonstrates that there are three (out of 64) ways for a bag containing [
]
to produce the data
. We have no way to decide among these three ways. The infer-
ential power comes from comparing this count to the numbers of ways each of the other
conjectures of the bag’s contents could produce the same data. For example, consider the
conjecture [
]. There are zero ways for this conjecture to produce the observed data,
because even one
is logically incompatible with it. The conjecture [
] is likewise
logically incompatible with the data. So we can eliminate these two conjectures, because
neither provides even a single path that is consistent with the data.
Figure 2.4 displays the full garden now, for the remaining three conjectures: [
],
[
], and [
]. The upper-left wedge displays the same garden as Figure 2.3.
The upper-right shows the analogous garden for the conjecture that the bag contains three
blue marbles and one white marble. And the bottom wedge shows the garden for two blue
