2.1. THE GARDEN OF FORKING DATA
25
Bayesian inference is justified that no other approach can also be justified. Golems come in many
types, and some of all types are useful.
2.1.2. Combining other information. We may have additional information about the rel-
ative plausibility of each conjecture. This information could arise from knowledge of how
the contents of the bag were generated. It could also arise from previous data. Whatever the
source, it would help to have a way to combine different sources of information to update
the plausibilities. Luckily there is a natural solution: Just multiply the counts.
To grasp this solution, suppose we’re willing to say each conjecture is equally plausible
at the start. So we just compare the counts of ways in which each conjecture is compatible
with the observed data. This comparison suggests that [
] is slightly more plausible
than [
], and both are about three times more plausible than [
]. Since these
are our initial counts, and we are going to update them next, let’s label them prior.
Now suppose we draw another marble from the bag to get another observation:
. Now
you have two choices. You could start all over again, making a garden with four layers to trace
out the paths compatible with the data sequence
. Or you could take the previous
counts—the prior counts—over conjectures (0, 3, 8, 9, 0) and just update them in light of the
new observation. It turns out that these two methods are mathematically identical, as long
as the new observation is logically independent of the previous observations.
Here’s how to do it. First we count the numbers of ways each conjecture could produce
the new observation,
. Then we multiply each of these new counts by the prior numbers
of ways for each conjecture. In table form:
Ways to
Prior
Conjecture
produce
counts
New count
[
]
0
0
0 × 0 = 0
[
]
1
3
3 × 1 = 3
[
]
2
8
8 × 2 = 16
[
]
3
9
9 × 3 = 27
[
]
4
0
0 × 4 = 0
The new counts in the right-hand column above summarize all the evidence for each conjec-
ture. As new data arrive, and provided those data are independent of previous observations,
then the number of logically possible ways for a conjecture to produce all the data up to that
point can be computed just by multiplying the new count by the old count.
This updating approach amounts to nothing more than asserting that (1) when we have
previous information suggesting there are Wprior ways for a conjecture to produce a previous
observation Dprior and (2) we acquire new observations Dnew that the same conjecture can
produce in Wnew ways, then (3) the number of ways the conjecture can account for both
Dprior as well as Dnew is just the product Wprior × Wnew. For example, in the table above the
conjecture [
] has Wprior = 8 ways to produce Dprior =
. It also has Wnew = 2
ways to produce the new observation Dnew =
. So there are 8 × 2 = 16 ways for the
conjecture to produce both Dprior and Dnew. Why multiply? Multiplication is just a shortcut
to enumerating and counting up all of the paths through the garden that could produce all
the observations.
In this example, the prior data and new data are of the same type: marbles drawn from
the bag. But in general, the prior data and new data can be of different types. Suppose for
example that someone from the marble factory tells you that blue marbles are rare. So for
