1.2. STATISTICAL RETHINKING
5
For both of these reasons, deductive falsification never works. The scientific method cannot
be reduced to a statistical procedure, and so our statistical methods should not pretend. Sta-
tistical evidence is part of the hot mess that is science, with all of its combat and egotism and
mutual coercion. If you believe, as I do, that science does often work, then learning that it
doesn’t work via falsification shouldn’t change your mind. But it might help you do better
science, because it will open your eyes to many legitimately useful functions of statistical
golems.
Rethinking: Is NHST falsificationist? Null hypothesis significance testing, NHST, is often identified
with the falsificationist, or Popperian, philosophy of science. However, usually NHST is used to falsify
a null hypothesis, not the actual research hypothesis. So the falsification is being done to something
other than the explanatory model. This seems the reverse from Karl Popper’s philosophy.5
1.2.1. Hypotheses are not models. When we attempt to falsify a hypothesis, we must work
with a model of some kind. Even when the attempt is not explicitly statistical, there is always
a tacit model of measurement, of evidence, that operationalizes the hypothesis. All models
are false,6 so what does it mean to falsify a model? One consequence of the requirement
to work with models is that it’s no longer possible to deduce that a hypothesis is false, just
because we reject a model derived from it.
Let’s explore this consequence in the context of an example from population biology
(Figure 1.2). Beginning in the 1960s, evolutionary biologists became interested in the pro-
posal that the majority of evolutionary changes in gene frequency are caused not by natural
selection, but rather by mutation and drift. No one really doubted that natural selection is re-
sponsible for functional design. This was a debate about genetic sequences. So began several
productive decades of scholarly combat over “neutral” models of molecular evolution.7 This
combat is most strongly associated with Motoo Kimura (1924–1994), who was perhaps the
strongest advocate of neutral models. But many other population geneticists participated.
As time has passed, related disciplines such as community ecology8 and anthropology9 have
experienced (or are currently experiencing) their own versions of the neutrality debate.
Let’s use the schematic in Figure 1.2 to explore connections between motivating hy-
potheses and different models, in the context of the neutral evolution debate. On the left,
there are two stereotyped, informal hypotheses: Either evolution is “neutral” (H0) or natu-
ral selection matters somehow (H1). These hypotheses have vague boundaries, because they
begin as verbal conjectures, not precise models. There are thousands of possible detailed
processes that can be described as “neutral,” depending upon choices about, for example,
population structure, number of sites, number of alleles at each site, mutation rates, and
recombination.
Once we have made these choices, we have the middle column in Figure 1.2, detailed
process models of evolution. P0A and P0B differ in that one assumes the population size
and structure have been constant long enough for the distribution of alleles to reach a steady
state. The other imagines instead that population size fluctuates through time, which can
be true even when there is no selective difference among alleles. The “selection matters”
hypothesis H1 likewise corresponds to many different process models. I’ve shown two big
players: a model in which selection always favors certain alleles and another in which selec-
tion fluctuates through time, favoring different alleles.10
An important feature of these process models is that they express causal structure. Dif-
ferent process models formalize different cause and effect relationships. Whether analyzed
