18
1. THE GOLEM OF PRAGUE
support this goal, the chapter introduced Bayesian inference, model comparison, multilevel
models, and graphical causal models. The remainder of the book is organized into four in-
terdependent parts.
(1) Chapters 2 and 3 are foundational. They introduce Bayesian inference and the basic
tools for performing Bayesian calculations. They move quite slowly and emphasize
a purely logical interpretation of probability theory.
(2) The next four chapters, 4 through 9, build multiple linear regression as a Bayesian
tool. This tool supports causal inference, but only when we analyze separate causal
models that help us determine which variables to include. These chapters empha-
size plotting results instead of attempting to interpret estimates of individual pa-
rameters. Problems of model complexity—overfitting—also feature prominently.
So you’ll also get an introduction to information theory and formal model compar-
ison in Chapter 7.
(3) The third part of the book, Chapters 9 through 12, presents generalized linear mod-
els of several types. Chapter 9 introduces Markov chain Monte Carlo, used to fit the
models in later chapters. Chapter 10 introduces maximum entropy as an explicit
procedure to help us design and interpret these models. Then Chapters 11 and 12
detail the models themselves.
(4) The last part, Chapters 13 through 16, gets around to multilevel models, as well as
specialized models that address measurement error, missing data, and spatial cor-
relation. This material is fairly advanced, but it proceeds in the same mechanistic
way as earlier material. Chapter 16 departs from the rest of the book in deploy-
ing models which are not of the generalized linear type but are rather theoretical
models expressed directly as statistical models.
The final chapter, Chapter 17, returns to some of the issues raised in this first one.
At the end of each chapter, there are practice problems ranging from easy to hard. These
problems help you test your comprehension. The harder ones expand on the material, intro-
ducing new examples and obstacles.
