28
2. SMALL WORLDS AND LARGE WORLDS
In the next major section, you’ll meet the more formal notation for these objects and see how
they compose a simple statistical model.
Rethinking: Randomization. When you shuffle a deck of cards or assign subjects to treatments by
flipping a coin, it is common to say that the resulting deck and treatment assignments are randomized.
What does it mean to randomize something? It just means that we have processed the thing so that we
know almost nothing about its arrangement. Shuffling a deck of cards changes our state of knowledge,
so that we no longer have any specific information about the ordering of cards. However, the bonus
that arises from this is that, if we really have shuffled enough to erase any prior knowledge of the
ordering, then the order the cards end up in is very likely to be one of the many orderings with high
information entropy. The concept of information entropy will be increasingly important as we
progress, and will be unpacked in Chapters 7 and 10.
2.2. Building a model
By working with probabilities instead of raw counts, Bayesian inference is made much
easier, but it looks much harder. So in this section, we follow up on the garden of forking
data by presenting the conventional form of a Bayesian statistical model. The toy example
we’ll use here has the anatomy of a typical statistical analysis, so it’s the style that you’ll grow
accustomed to. But every piece of it can be mapped onto the garden of forking data. The
logic is the same.
Suppose you have a globe representing our planet, the Earth. This version of the world
is small enough to hold in your hands. You are curious how much of the surface is covered
in water. You adopt the following strategy: You will toss the globe up in the air. When you
catch it, you will record whether or not the surface under your right index finger is water or
land. Then you toss the globe up in the air again and repeat the procedure.43 This strategy
generates a sequence of surface samples from the globe. The first nine samples might look
like:
W L W W W L W L W
where W indicates water and L indicates land. So in this example you observe six W (water)
observations and three L (land) observations. Call this sequence of observations the data.
To get the logic moving, we need to make assumptions, and these assumptions constitute
the model. Designing a simple Bayesian model benefits from a design loop with three steps.
(1) Data story: Motivate the model by narrating how the data might arise.
(2) Update: Educate your model by feeding it the data.
(3) Evaluate: All statistical models require supervision, leading possibly to model revi-
sion.
The next sections walk through these steps, in the context of the globe tossing evidence.
2.2.1. A data story. Bayesian data analysis usually means producing a story for how the
data came to be. This story may be descriptive, specifying associations that can be used to
predict outcomes, given observations. Or it may be causal, a theory of how some events
produce other events. Typically, any story you intend to be causal may also be descriptive.
But many descriptive stories are hard to interpret causally. But all data stories are complete,
in the sense that they are sufficient for specifying an algorithm for simulating new data. In
the next chapter, you’ll see examples of doing just that, as simulating new data is useful not
only for model criticism but also for model construction.
