8
1. THE GOLEM OF PRAGUE
1.2.2. Measurement matters. The logic of falsification is very simple. We have a hypothesis
H, and we show that it entails some observation D. Then we look for D. If we don’t find it,
we must conclude that H is false. Logicians call this kind of reasoning modus tollens, which
is Latin shorthand for “the method of destruction.” In contrast, finding D tells us nothing
certain about H, because other hypotheses might also predict D.
A compelling scientific fable that employs modus tollens concerns the color of swans.
Before discovering Australia, all swans that any European had ever seen had white feathers.
This led to the belief that all swans are white. Let’s call this a formal hypothesis:
H0: All swans are white.
When Europeans reached Australia, however, they encountered swans with black feathers.
This evidence seemed to instantly prove H0 to be false. Indeed, not all swans are white. Some
are certainly black, according to all observers. The key insight here is that, before voyaging
to Australia, no number of observations of white swans could prove H0 to be true. However
it required only one observation of a black swan to prove it false.
This is a seductive story. If we can believe that important scientific hypotheses can be
stated in this form, then we have a powerful method for improving the accuracy of our the-
ories: look for evidence that disconfirms our hypotheses. Whenever we find a black swan,
H0 must be false. Progress!
Seeking disconfirming evidence is important, but it cannot be as powerful as the swan
story makes it appear. In addition to the correspondence problems among hypotheses and
models, discussed in the previous section, most of the problems scientists confront are not so
logically discrete. Instead, we most often face two simultaneous problems that make the swan
fable misrepresentative. First, observations are prone to error, especially at the boundaries
of scientific knowledge. Second, most hypotheses are quantitative, concerning degrees of
existence, rather than discrete, concerning total presence or absence. Let’s briefly consider
each of these problems.
1.2.2.1. Observation error. All observers will agree under most conditions that a swan
is either black or white. There are few intermediate shades, and most observers’ eyes work
similarly enough that there will be little, if any, disagreement about which swans are white
and which are black. But this kind of example is hardly commonplace in science, at least in
mature fields. Instead, we routinely confront contexts in which we are not sure if we have
detected a disconfirming result. At the edges of scientific knowledge, the ability to measure
a hypothetical phenomenon is often in question as much as the phenomenon itself.
Here are two examples.
In 2005, a team of ornithologists from Cornell claimed to have evidence of an individual
Ivory-billed Woodpecker (Campephilus principalis), a species thought extinct. The hypothe-
sis implied here is:
H0: The Ivory-billed Woodpecker is extinct.
It would only take one observation to falsify this hypothesis. However, many doubted the
evidence. Despite extensive search efforts and a $50,000 cash reward for information leading
to a live specimen, no evidence satisfying all parties has yet (by 2015) emerged. Even if good
physical evidence does eventually arise, this episode should serve as a counterpoint to the
swan story. Finding disconfirming cases is complicated by the difficulties of observation.
Black swans are not always really black swans, and sometimes white swans are really black
swans. There are mistaken confirmations (false positives) and mistaken disconfirmations
(false negatives). Against this background of measurement difficulties, scientists who already
