64
3. SAMPLING THE IMAGINARY
Rethinking: Sampling distributions. Many readers will already have seen simulated observations.
Sampling distributions are the foundation of common non-Bayesian statistical traditions. In
those approaches, inference about parameters is made through the sampling distribution. In this
book, inference about parameters is never done directly through a sampling distribution. The poste-
rior distribution is not sampled, but deduced logically. Then samples can be drawn from the poste-
rior, as earlier in this chapter, to aid in inference. In neither case is “sampling” a physical act. In both
cases, it’s just a mathematical device and produces only small world (Chapter 2) numbers.
3.3.2. Model checking. Model checking means (1) ensuring the model fitting worked
correctly and (2) evaluating the adequacy of a model for some purpose. Since Bayesian mod-
els are always generative, able to simulate observations as well as estimate parameters from
observations, once you condition a model on data, you can simulate to examine the model’s
empirical expectations.
3.3.2.1. Did the software work? In the simplest case, we can check whether the software
worked by checking for correspondence between implied predictions and the data used to
fit the model. You might also call these implied predictions retrodictions, as they ask how
well the model reproduces the data used to educate it. An exact match is neither expected
nor desired. But when there is no correspondence at all, it probably means the software did
something wrong.
There is no way to really be sure that software works correctly. Even when the retro-
dictions correspond to the observed data, there may be subtle mistakes. And when you start
working with multilevel models, you’ll have to expect a certain pattern of lack of correspon-
dence between retrodictions and observations. Despite there being no perfect way to ensure
software has worked, the simple check I’m encouraging here often catches silly mistakes,
mistakes of the kind everyone makes from time to time.
In the case of the globe tossing analysis, the software implementation is simple enough
that it can be checked against analytical results. So instead let’s move directly to considering
the model’s adequacy.
3.3.2.2. Is the model adequate? After assessing whether the posterior distribution is the
correct one, because the software worked correctly, it’s useful to also look for aspects of the
data that are not well described by the model’s expectations. The goal is not to test whether
the model’s assumptions are “true,” because all models are false. Rather, the goal is to assess
exactly how the model fails to describe the data, as a path towards model comprehension,
revision, and improvement.
All models fail in some respect, so you have to use your judgment—as well as the judg-
ments of your colleagues—to decide whether any particular failure is or is not important.
Few scientists want to produce models that do nothing more than re-describe existing sam-
ples. So imperfect prediction (retrodiction) is not a bad thing. Typically we hope to either
predict future observations or understand enough that we might usefully tinker with the
world. We’ll consider these problems again, in Chapter 6.
For now, we need to learn how to combine sampling of simulated observations, as in the
previous section, with sampling parameters from the posterior distribution. We expect to
do better when we use the entire posterior distribution, not just some point estimate derived
from it. Why? Because there is a lot of information about uncertainty in the entire posterior
