14
1. THE GOLEM OF PRAGUE
model that is unaware of this fact tends to make worse predictions than it could. And more
complex models tend towards more overfitting than simple ones—the smarter the golem,
the dumber its predictions. So if we wish to make good predictions, we cannot judge our
models simply on how well they fit our data.
Cross-validation and information criteria help us in three related ways. First, they pro-
vide useful expectations of predictive accuracy, rather than merely fit to sample. So they
compare models where it matters. Second, they give us an estimate of the tendency of a
model to overfit the data. This will help us to understand how models and data interact,
which in turn helps us to design better models. We’ll take this point up again in the next sec-
tion. Third, cross-validation and information criteria can help us to spot highly influential
observations.
Bayesian data analysis has been worked on for centuries. Information criteria are com-
paratively very young and the field is evolving quickly. Many statisticians have never used
information criteria in an applied problem, and there is no consensus about which metrics
are best and how best to use them. Still, information criteria are already in frequent use
in the sciences, appearing in prominent publications and featuring in prominent debates30.
Their power is often exaggerated, and we will be careful to note what they cannot do as well
as what they can.
Rethinking: The Neanderthal in you. Even simple models need alternatives. In 2010, a draft genome
of a Neanderthal demonstrated more DNA sequences in common with non-African contemporary
humans than with African ones. This finding is consistent with interbreeding between Neanderthals
and modern humans, as the latter dispersed from Africa. However, just finding DNA in common
between modern Europeans and Neanderthals is not enough to demonstrate interbreeding. It is also
consistent with ancient structure in the African continent.31 In short, if ancient north-east Africans
had unique DNA sequences, then both Neanderthals and modern Europeans could possess these
sequences from a common ancestor, rather than from direct interbreeding. So even in the seemingly
simple case of estimating whether Neanderthals and modern humans share unique DNA, there is
more than one process-based explanation. Model comparison is necessary.
1.3.3. Multilevel models. In an apocryphal telling of Hindu cosmology, it is said that the
Earth rests on the back of a great elephant, who in turn stands on the back of a massive turtle.
When asked upon what the turtle stands, a guru is said to reply, “it’s turtles all the way down.”
Statistical models don’t contain turtles, but they do contain parameters. And parameters
support inference. Upon what do parameters themselves stand? Sometimes, in some of
the most powerful models, it’s parameters all the way down. What this means is that any
particular parameter can be usefully regarded as a placeholder for a missing model. Given
some model of how the parameter gets its value, it is simple enough to embed the new model
inside the old one. This results in a model with multiple levels of uncertainty, each feeding
into the next—a multilevel model.
Multilevel models—also known as hierarchical, random effects, varying effects, or mixed
effects models—are becoming de rigueur in the biological and social sciences. Fields as di-
verse as educational testing and bacterial phylogenetics now depend upon routine multilevel
models to process data. Like Bayesian data analysis, multilevel modeling is not particularly
new, but it has only been available on desktop computers for a few decades. And since such
models have a natural Bayesian representation, they have grown hand-in-hand with Bayesian
data analysis.
