3.2. SAMPLING TO SUMMARIZE
53
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
proportion water (p)
Density
Figure 3.1. Sampling parameter values from the posterior distribution.
Left: 10,000 samples from the posterior implied by the globe tossing data
and model. Right: The density of samples (vertical) at each parameter value
(horizontal).
You can see that the estimated density is very similar to ideal posterior you computed via
grid approximation. If you draw even more samples, maybe 1e5 or 1e6, the density estimate
will get more and more similar to the ideal.
All you’ve done so far is crudely replicate the posterior density you had already com-
puted. That isn’t of much value. But next it is time to use these samples to describe and
understand the posterior. That is of great value.
3.2. Sampling to summarize
Once your model produces a posterior distribution, the model’s work is done. But your
work has just begun. It is necessary to summarize and interpret the posterior distribution.
Exactly how it is summarized depends upon your purpose. But common questions include:
• How much posterior probability lies below some parameter value?
• How much posterior probability lies between two parameter values?
• Which parameter value marks the lower 5% of the posterior probability?
• Which range of parameter values contains 90% of the posterior probability?
• Which parameter value has highest posterior probability?
These simple questions can be usefully divided into questions about (1) intervals of defined
boundaries, (2) questions about intervals of defined probability mass, and (3) questions about
point estimates. We’ll see how to approach these questions using samples from the posterior.
3.2.1. Intervals of defined boundaries. Suppose I ask you for the posterior probability that
the proportion of water is less than 0.5. Using the grid-approximate posterior, you can just
add up all of the probabilities, where the corresponding parameter value is less than 0.5:
R code
3.6
# add up posterior probability where p < 0.5
sum( posterior[ p_grid < 0.5 ] )
