2.4. MAKING THE MODEL GO
39
Rethinking: Bayesian data analysis isn’t about Bayes’ theorem. A common notion about Bayesian
data analysis, and Bayesian inference more generally, is that it is distinguished by the use of Bayes’
theorem. This is a mistake. Inference under any probability concept will eventually make use of Bayes’
theorem. Common introductory examples of “Bayesian” analysis using HIV and DNA testing are not
uniquely Bayesian. Since all of the elements of the calculation are frequencies of observations, a non-
Bayesian analysis would do exactly the same thing. Instead, Bayesian approaches get to use Bayes’
theorem more generally, to quantify uncertainty about theoretical entities that cannot be observed,
like parameters and models. Powerful inferences can be produced under both Bayesian and non-
Bayesian probability concepts, but different justifications and sacrifices are necessary.
2.4.2. Motors. Recall that your Bayesian model is a machine, a figurative golem. It has built-
in definitions for the likelihood, the parameters, and the prior. And then at its heart lies a
motor that processes data, producing a posterior distribution. The action of this motor can
be thought of as conditioning the prior on the data. As explained in the previous section, this
conditioning is governed by the rules of probability theory, which defines a uniquely logical
posterior for set of assumptions and observations.
However, knowing the mathematical rule is often of little help, because many of the in-
teresting models in contemporary science cannot be conditioned formally, no matter your
skill in mathematics. And while some broadly useful models like linear regression can be
conditioned formally, this is only possible if you constrain your choice of prior to special
forms that are easy to do mathematics with. We’d like to avoid forced modeling choices of
this kind, instead favoring conditioning engines that can accommodate whichever prior is
most useful for inference.
What this means is that various numerical techniques are needed to approximate the
mathematics that follows from the definition of Bayes’ theorem. In this book, you’ll meet
three different conditioning engines, numerical techniques for computing posterior distri-
butions:
(1) Grid approximation
(2) Quadratic approximation
(3) Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
There are many other engines, and new ones are being invented all the time. But the three
you’ll get to know here are common and widely useful. In addition, as you learn them, you’ll
also learn principles that will help you understand other techniques.
Rethinking: How you fit the model is part of the model. Earlier in this chapter, I implicitly defined
the model as a composite of a prior and a likelihood. That definition is typical. But in practical terms,
we should also consider how the model is fit to data as part of the model. In very simple problems,
like the globe tossing example that consumes this chapter, calculation of the posterior density is trivial
and foolproof. In even moderately complex problems, however, the details of fitting the model to
data force us to recognize that our numerical technique influences our inferences. This is because
different mistakes and compromises arise under different techniques. The same model fit to the same
data using different techniques may produce different answers. When something goes wrong, every
piece of the machine may be suspect. And so our golems carry with them their updating engines, as
much slaves to their engineering as they are to the priors and likelihoods we program into them.
