4
1. THE GOLEM OF PRAGUE
They only understand association. Without our guidance and skepticism, pre-manufactured
golems may do nothing useful at all. Worse, they might wreck Prague.
Whatresearchers need is some unified theory of golem engineering, a set of principles for
designing, building, and refining special-purpose statistical procedures. Every major branch
of statistical philosophy possesses such a unified theory. But the theory is never taught in
introductory—and often not even in advanced—courses. So there are benefits in rethinking
statistical inference as a set of strategies, instead of a set of pre-made tools.
1.2. Statistical rethinking
A lot can go wrong with statistical inference, and this is one reason that beginners are
so anxious about it. When the framework is to choose a pre-made test from a flowchart,
then the anxiety can mount as one worries about choosing the “correct” test. Statisticians,
for their part, can derive pleasure from scolding scientists, making the psychological battle
worse.
But anxiety can be cultivated into wisdom. That is the reason that this book insists on
working with the computational nuts and bolts of each golem. If you don’t understand how
the golem processes information, then you can’t interpret the golem’s output. This requires
knowing the statistical model in greater detail than is customary, and it requires doing the
computations the hard way, at least until you are wise enough to use the push-button solu-
tions.
There are conceptual obstacles as well, obstacles with how scholars define statistical ob-
jectives and interpret statistical results. Understanding any individual golem is not enough,
in these cases. Instead, we need some statistical epistemology, an appreciation of how sta-
tistical models relate to hypotheses and the natural mechanisms of interest. What are we
supposed to be doing with these little computational machines, anyway?
The greatest obstacle that I encounter among students and colleagues is the tacit belief
that the proper objective of statistical inference is to test null hypotheses.3 This is the proper
objective, the thinking goes, because Karl Popper argued that science advances by falsifying
hypotheses. Karl Popper (1902–1994) is possibly the most influential philosopher of science,
at least among scientists. He did persuasively argue that science works better by developing
hypotheses that are, in principle, falsifiable. Seeking out evidence that might embarrass our
ideas is a normative standard, and one that most scholars—whether they describe themselves
as scientists or not—subscribe to. So maybe statistical procedures should falsify hypotheses,
if we wish to be good statistical scientists.
But the above is a kind of folk Popperism, an informal philosophy of science common
among scientists but not among philosophers of science. Science is not described by the falsi-
fication standard, and Popper recognized that.4 In fact, deductive falsification is impossible
in nearly every scientific context. In this section, I review two reasons for this impossibility.
(1) Hypotheses are not models. The relations among hypotheses and different kinds of
models are complex. Many models correspond to the same hypothesis, and many
hypotheses correspond to a single model. This makes strict falsification impossible.
(2) Measurement matters. Even when we think the data falsify a model, another ob-
server will debate our methods and measures. They don’t trust the data. Sometimes
they are right.
