20
2. SMALL WORLDS AND LARGE WORLDS
Figure 2.1. Illustration of Martin Behaim’s
1492 globe, showing the small world that
Colombo anticipated. Europe lies on the right-
hand side. Asia lies on the left. The big island
labeled “Cipangu” is Japan.
In this chapter, you will begin to build Bayesian models. The way that Bayesian models
learn from evidence is arguably optimal in the small world. When their assumptions approx-
imate reality, they also perform well in the large world. But large world performance has to
be demonstrated rather than logically deduced. Passing back and forth between these two
worlds allows both formal methods, like Bayesian inference, and informal methods, like peer
review, to play an indispensable role.
This chapter focuses on the small world. It explains probability theory in its essential
form: counting the ways things can happen. Bayesian inference arises automatically from
this perspective. Then the chapter presents the stylized components of a Bayesian statistical
model, a model for learning from data. Then it shows you how to animate the model, to
produce estimates.
All this work provides a foundation for the next chapter, in which you’ll learn to sum-
marize Bayesian estimates, as well as begin to consider large world obligations.
Rethinking: Fast and frugal in the large world. The natural world is complex, as trying to do science
serves to remind us. Yet everything from the humble tick to the industrious squirrel to the idle sloth
manages to frequently make adaptive decisions. But it’s a good bet that most animals are not Bayesian,
if only because being Bayesian is expensive and depends upon having a good model. Instead, animals
use various heuristics that are fit to their environments, past or present. These heuristics take adaptive
shortcuts and so may outperform a rigorous Bayesian analysis, once costs of information gathering
and processing (and overfitting, Chapter 6) are taken into account.40 Once you already know which
information to ignore or attend to, being fully Bayesian is a waste. It’s neither necessary nor sufficient
for making good decisions, as real animals demonstrate. But for human animals, Bayesian analysis
provides a general way to discover relevant information and process it logically. Just don’t think that
it is the only way.
2.1. The garden of forking data
Our goal in this section will be to build Bayesian inference up from humble beginnings,
so there is no superstition about it. Bayesian inference is really just counting and comparing
of possibilities. Consider by analogy Jorge Luis Borges’ short story “The Garden of Forking
Paths.” The story is about a man who encounters a book filled with contradictions. In most
books, characters arrive at plot points and must decide among alternative paths. A protag-
onist may arrive at a man’s home. She might kill the man, or rather take a cup of tea. Only
