1.1. STATISTICAL GOLEMS
3
And so it remains a triumph of statistical science that there are now so many diverse golems,
each useful in a particular context. Viewed this way, statistics is neither mathematics nor a
science, but rather a branch of engineering. And like engineering, a common set of design
principles and constraints produces a great diversity of specialized applications.
This diversity of applications helps to explain why introductory statistics courses are so
often confusing to the initiates. Instead of a single method for building, refining, and cri-
tiquing statistical models, students are offered a zoo of pre-constructed golems known as
“tests.” Each test has a particular purpose. Decision trees, like the one in Figure 1.1, are
common. By answering a series of sequential questions, users choose the “correct” proce-
dure for their research circumstances.
Unfortunately, while experienced statisticians grasp the unity of these procedures, stu-
dents and researchers rarely do. Advanced courses in statistics do emphasize engineering
principles, but most scientists never get that far. Teaching statistics this way is somewhat
like teaching engineering backwards, starting with bridge building and ending with basic
physics. So students and many scientists tend to use charts like Figure 1.1 without much
thought to their underlying structure, without much awareness of the models that each proce-
dure embodies, and without any framework to help them make the inevitable compromises
required by real research. It’s not their fault.
For some, the toolbox of pre-manufactured golems is all they will ever need. Provided
they stay within well-tested contexts, using only a few different procedures in appropriate
tasks, a lot of good science can be completed. This is similar to how plumbers can do a lot
of useful work without knowing much about fluid dynamics. Serious trouble begins when
scholars move on to conducting innovative research, pushing the boundaries of their spe-
cialties. It’s as if we got our hydraulic engineers by promoting plumbers.
Why aren’t the tests enough for research? The classical procedures of introductory sta-
tistics tend to be inflexible and fragile. By inflexible, I mean that they have very limited ways
to adapt to unique research contexts. By fragile, I mean that they fail in unpredictable ways
when applied to new contexts. This matters, because at the boundaries of most sciences,
it is hardly ever clear which procedure is appropriate. None of the traditional golems has
been evaluated in novel research settings, and so it can be hard to choose one and then to
understand how it behaves. A good example is Fisher’s exact test, which applies (exactly) to
an extremely narrow empirical context, but is regularly used whenever cell counts are small.
I have personally read hundreds of uses of Fisher’s exact test in scientific journals, but aside
from Fisher’s original use of it, I have never seen it used appropriately. Even a procedure like
ordinary linear regression, which is quite flexible in many ways, being able to encode a large
diversity of interesting hypotheses, is sometimes fragile. For example, if there is substan-
tial measurement error on prediction variables, then the procedure can fail in spectacular
ways. But more importantly, it is nearly always possible to do better than ordinary linear
regression, largely because of a phenomenon known as overfitting (Chapter 7).
The point isn’t that statistical tools are specialized. Of course they are. The point is that
classical tools are not diverse enough to handle many common research questions. Every
active area of science contends with unique difficulties of measurement and interpretation,
converses with idiosyncratic theories in a dialect barely understood by other scientists from
other tribes. Statistical experts outside the discipline can help, but they are limited by lack of
fluency in the empirical and theoretical concerns of the discipline.
Furthermore, no statistical tool does anything on its own to address the basic problem
of inferring causes from evidence. Statistical golems do not understand cause and effect.
