1.3. TOOLS FOR GOLEM ENGINEERING
11
both formal and heuristic, can be effective. But one of the most effective and general answers
is to use Bayesian data analysis. Bayesian data analysis takes a question in the form of a model
and uses logic to produce an answer in the form of probability distributions.
In modest terms, Bayesian data analysis is no more than counting the numbers of ways
the data could happen, according to our assumptions. Things that can happen more ways
are more plausible. Probability theory is relevant because probability is just a calculus for
counting. This allows us to use probability theory as a general way to represent plausibility,
whether in reference to countable events in the world or rather theoretical constructs like
parameters. The rest follows logically. Once we have defined the statistical model, Bayesian
data analysis forces a purely logical way of processing the data to produce inference.
Chapter 2 explains this in depth. For now, it will help to have another approach to com-
pare. Bayesian probability is a very general approach to probability, and it includes as a
special case another important approach, the frequentist approach. The frequentist ap-
proach requires that all probabilities be defined by connection to the frequencies of events
in very large samples.21 This leads to frequentist uncertainty being premised on imaginary
resampling of data—if we were to repeat the measurement many many times, we would end
up collecting a list of values that will have some pattern to it. It means also that parameters
and models cannot have probability distributions, only measurements can. The distribution
of these measurements is called a sampling distribution. This resampling is never done,
and in general it doesn’t even make sense—it is absurd to consider repeat sampling of the
diversification of song birds in the Andes. As Sir Ronald Fisher, one of the most important
frequentist statisticians of the 20th century, put it:
[...] the only populations that can be referred to in a test of significance
have no objective reality, being exclusively the product of the statistician’s
imagination [...]22
But in many contexts, like controlled greenhouse experiments, it’s a useful device for describ-
ing uncertainty. Whatever the context, it’s just part of the model, an assumption about what
the data would look like under resampling. It’s just as fantastical as the Bayesian gambit of
using probability to describe all types of uncertainty, whether empirical or epistemological.23
But these different attitudes towards probability do enforce different trade-offs. Con-
sider this simple example where the difference between Bayesian and frequentist probability
matters. In the year 1610, Galileo turned a primitive telescope to the night sky and became
the first human to see Saturn’s rings. Well, he probably saw a blob, with some smaller blobs
attached to it (Figure 1.3). Since the telescope was primitive, it couldn’t really focus the im-
age very well. Saturn always appeared blurred. This is a statistical problem, of a sort. There’s
uncertainty about the planet’s shape, but notice that none of the uncertainty is a result of vari-
ation in repeat measurements. We could look through the telescope a thousand times, and
it will always give the same blurred image (for any given position of the Earth and Saturn).
So the sampling distribution of any measurement is constant, because the measurement is
deterministic—there’s nothing “random” about it. Frequentist statistical inference has a lot
of trouble getting started here. In contrast, Bayesian inference proceeds as usual, because
the deterministic “noise” can still be modeled using probability, as long as we don’t identify
probability with frequency. As a result, the field of image reconstruction and processing is
dominated by Bayesian algorithms.24
In more routine statistical procedures, like linear regression, this difference in proba-
bility concepts has less of an effect. However, it is important to realize that even when a
Bayesian procedure and frequentist procedure give exactly the same answer, our Bayesian
