2.1. THE GARDEN OF FORKING DATA
27
That little ∝means proportional to. We want to compare the plausibility of each possible bag
composition. So it’ll be helpful to define p as the proportion of marbles that are blue. For [
], p = 1/4 = 0.25. Also let Dnew =
. And now we can write:
plausibility of p after Dnew ∝ways p can produce Dnew × prior plausibility of p
The above just means that for any value p can take, we judge the plausibility of that value p
as proportional to the number of ways it can get through the garden of forking data. This
expression just summarizes the calculations you did in the tables of the previous section.
Finally, we construct probabilities by standardizing the plausibility so that the sum of
the plausibilities for all possible conjectures will be one. All you need to do in order to stan-
dardize is to add up all of the products, one for each value p can take, and then divide each
product by the sum of products:
plausibility of p after Dnew = ways p can produce Dnew × prior plausibility p
sum of products
A worked example is needed for this to really make sense. So consider again the table from
before, now updated using our definitions of p and “plausibility”:
Ways to
Possible composition
p
produce data
Plausibility
[
]
0
0
0
[
]
0.25
3
0.15
[
]
0.5
8
0.40
[
]
0.75
9
0.45
[
]
1
0
0
You can quickly compute these plausibilities in R:
R code
2.1
ways <- c( 0 , 3 , 8 , 9 , 0 )
ways/sum(ways)
[1] 0.00 0.15 0.40 0.45 0.00
The values in ways are the products mentioned before. And sum(ways) is the denominator
“sum of products” in the expression near the top of the page.
These plausibilities are also probabilities—they are non-negative (zero or positive) real
numbers that sum to one. And all of the mathematical things you can do with probabilities
you can also do with these values. Specifically, each piece of the calculation has a direct
partner in applied probability theory. These partners have stereotyped names, so it’s worth
learning them, as you’ll see them again and again.
• A conjectured proportion of blue marbles, p, is usually called a parameter value.
It’s just a way of indexing possible explanations of the data.
• The relative number of ways that a value p can produce the data is usually called
a likelihood. It is derived by enumerating all the possible data sequences that
could have happened and then eliminating those sequences inconsistent with the
data.
• The prior plausibility of any specific p is usually called the prior probability.
• The new, updated plausibility of any specific p is usually called the posterior
probability.
