6
1. THE GOLEM OF PRAGUE
H0
H1
“Evolution
   is neutral”
“Selection
   matters”
P0A
Neutral,
non-equilibrium
P0B
Neutral,
equilibrium
P1B
Fluctuating
selection
P1A
Constant
selection
MI
MII
MIII
Hypotheses
Process models
Statistical models
Figure 1.2. Relations among hypotheses (left), detailed process models
(middle), and statistical models (right), illustrated by the example of “neu-
tral” models of evolution. Hypotheses (H) are typically vague, and so cor-
respond to more than one process model (P). Statistical evaluations of hy-
potheses rarely address process models directly. Instead, they rely upon
statistical models (M), all of which reflect only some aspects of the process
models. As a result, relations are multiple in both directions: Hypotheses
do not imply unique models, and models do not imply unique hypotheses.
This fact greatly complicates statistical inference.
mathematically or through simulation, the direction of time in a model means that some
things cause other things, but not the reverse. You can use such models to perform experi-
ments and probe their causal implications. Sometimes these probes reveal, before we even
turn to statistical inference, that the model cannot explain a phenomenon of interest.
In order to challenge process models with data, they have to be made into statistical
models. Unfortunately, statistical models do not embody specific causal relationships. A
statistical model expresses associations among variables. As a result, many different process
models may be consistent with any single statistical model.
How do we get a statistical model from a causal model? One way is to derive the ex-
pected frequency distribution of some quantity—a “statistic”—from the causal model. For
example, a common statistic in this context is the frequency distribution (histogram) of the
frequency of different genetic variants (alleles). Some alleles are rare, appearing in only a
few individuals. Others are very common, appearing in very many individuals in the popu-
lation. A famous result in population genetics is that a model like P0A produces a power law
distribution of allele frequencies. And so this fact yields a statistical model, MII, that pre-
dicts a power law in the data. In contrast the constant selection process model P1A predicts
something quite different, MIII.
