4.1. WHY NORMAL DISTRIBUTIONS ARE NORMAL
77
4.1.3. Normal by log-multiplication. But wait, there’s more. Large deviates that are multi-
plied together do not produce Gaussian distributions, but they do tend to produce Gaussian
distributions on the log scale. For example:
R code
4.5
log.big <- replicate( 10000 , log(prod(1 + runif(12,0,0.5))) )
Yet another Gaussian distribution. We get the Gaussian distribution back, because adding
logs is equivalent to multiplying the original numbers. So even multiplicative interactions
of large deviations can produce Gaussian distributions, once we measure the outcomes on
the log scale. Since measurement scales are arbitrary, there’s nothing suspicious about this
transformation. After all, it’s natural to measure sound and earthquakes and even informa-
tion (Chapter 7) on a log scale.
4.1.4. Using Gaussian distributions. We’re going to spend the rest of this chapter using the
Gaussian distribution as a skeleton for our hypotheses, building up models of measurements
as aggregations of normal distributions. The justifications for using the Gaussian distribution
fall into two broad categories: (1) ontological and (2) epistemological.
4.1.4.1. Ontological justification. The world is full of Gaussian distributions, approxi-
mately. As a mathematical idealization, we’re never going to experience a perfect Gaussian
distribution. But it is a widespread pattern, appearing again and again at different scales
and in different domains. Measurement errors, variations in growth, and the velocities of
molecules all tend towards Gaussian distributions. These processes do this because at their
heart, these processes add together fluctuations. And repeatedly adding finite fluctuations
results in a distribution of sums that have shed all information about the underlying process,
aside from mean and spread.
One consequence of this is that statistical models based on Gaussian distributions can-
not reliably identify micro-process. This recalls the modeling philosophy from Chapter 1
(page 6). But it also means that these models can do useful work, even when they cannot
identify process. If we had to know the development biology of height before we could build
a statistical model of height, human biology would be sunk.
There are many other patterns in nature, so make no mistake in assuming that the Gauss-
ian pattern is universal. In later chapters, we’ll see how other useful and common patterns,
like the exponential and gamma and Poisson, also arise from natural processes. The Gauss-
ian is a member of a family of fundamental natural distributions known as the exponential
family. All of the members of this family are important for working science, because they
populate our world.
4.1.4.2. Epistemological justification. But the natural occurrence of the Gaussian distri-
bution is only one reason to build models around it. Another route to justifying the Gaussian
as our choice of skeleton, and a route that will help us appreciate later why it is often a poor
choice, is that it represents a particular state of ignorance. When all we know or are willing
to say about a distribution of measures (measures are continuous values on the real number
line) is their mean and variance, then the Gaussian distribution arises as the most consistent
with our assumptions.
That is to say that the Gaussian distribution is the most natural expression of our state
of ignorance, because if all we are willing to assume is that a measure has finite variance,
the Gaussian distribution is the shape that can be realized in the largest number of ways
and does not introduce any new assumptions. It is the least surprising and least informative
