2.3. COMPONENTS OF THE MODEL
33
The first variable is our target of inference, p, the proportion of water on the globe. This
variable cannot be observed. Unobserved variables are usually called parameters. But
while p itself is unobserved, we can infer it from the other variables.
The other variables are the observed variables, the counts of water and land. Call the
count of water W and the count of land L. The sum of these two variables is the number of
globe tosses: N = W + L.
2.3.2. Definitions. Once we have the variables listed, we then have to define each of them.
In defining each, we build a model that relates the variables to one another. Remember, the
goal is count all the ways the data could arise, given the assumptions. This means, as in
the globe tossing model, that for each possible value of the unobserved variables, such as
p, we need to define the relative number of ways—the probability—that the values of each
observed variable could arise. And then for each unobserved variable, we need to define the
prior plausibility of each value it could take. I appreciate that this is all a bit abstract. So here
are the specifics, for the globe.
2.3.2.1. Observed variables. For the count of water W and land L, we define how plau-
sible any combination of W and L would be, for a specific value of p. This is very much like
the marble counting we did earlier in the chapter. Each specific value of p corresponds to a
specific plausibility of the data, as in Figure 2.5.
So that we don’t have to literally count, we can use a mathematical function that tells
us the right plausibility. In conventional statistics, a distribution function assigned to an
observed variable is usually called a likelihood. That term has special meaning in non-
Bayesian statistics, however. We will be able to do things with our distributions that non-
Bayesian models forbid. So I will try to avoid the term likelihood, just to avoid confusing
you. But when someone says, “likelihood,” they will usually mean a distribution function
assigned to an observed variable.
In the case of the globe tossing model, the function we need can be derived directly from
the data story. Begin by nominating all of the possible events. There are two: water (W) and
land (L). There are no other events. The globe never gets stuck to the ceiling, for example.
When we observe a sample of W’s and L’s of length N (nine in the actual sample), we need
to say how likely that exact sample is, out of the universe of potential samples of the same
length. That might sound challenging, but it’s the kind of thing you get good at very quickly,
once you start practicing.
In this case, once we add our assumptions that (1) every toss is independent of the other
tosses and (2) the probability of W is the same on every toss, probability theory provides
a unique answer, known as the binomial distribution. This is the common “coin tossing”
distribution. And so the probability of observing W waters and L lands, with a probability p
of water on each toss, is:
Pr(W, L|p) = (W + L)!
W!L!
pW(1 −p)L
Read the above as:
The counts of “water” W and “land’ L are distributed binomially, with prob-
ability p of “water” on each toss.
And the binomial distribution formula is built into R, so you can easily compute the likeli-
hood of the data—six W’s in nine tosses—under any value of p with:
