xvi
PREFACE
R code
0.2
x <- 1:2
x <- x*10
x <- log(x)
x <- sum(x)
x <- exp(x)
x
200
If you don’t understand any particular step, you can always print out the contents of the sym-
bol x immediately after that step. For the code examples, this is how you come to understand
them. For your own code, this is how you find the source of any problems and then fix them.
Optional sections. Reflecting realism in how books like this are actually read, there are two
kinds of optional sections: (1) Rethinking and (2) Overthinking. The Rethinking sections
look like this:
Rethinking: Think again. The point of these Rethinking boxes is to provide broader context for the
material. They allude to connections to other approaches, provide historical background, or call out
common misunderstandings. These boxes are meant to be optional, but they round out the material
and invite deeper thought.
The Overthinking sections look like this:
Overthinking: Getting your hands dirty. These sections, set in smaller type, provide more detailed
explanations of code or mathematics. This material isn’t essential for understanding the main text.
But it does have a lot of value, especially on a second reading. For example, sometimes it matters how
you perform a calculation. Mathematics tells that these two expressions are equivalent:
p1 = log(0.01200)
p2 = 200 × log(0.01)
But when you use R to compute them, they yield different answers:
R code
0.3
( log( 0.01^200 ) )
( 200 * log(0.01) )
[1] -Inf
[1] -921.034
The second line is the right answer. This problem arises because of rounding error, when the computer
rounds very small decimal values to zero. This loses precision and can introduce substantial errors in
inference. As a result, we nearly always do statistical calculations using the logarithm of a probability,
rather than the probability itself.
You can ignore most of these Overthinking sections on a first read.
The command line is the best tool. Programming at the level needed to perform 21st cen-
tury statistical inference is not that complicated, but it is unfamiliar at first. Why not just
teach the reader how to do all of this with a point-and-click program? There are big advan-
tages to doing statistics with text commands, rather than pointing and clicking on menus.
