HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
xv
What the book assumes. This book does not try to teach the reader to program, in the most
basic sense. It assumes that you have made a basic effort to learn how to install and process
data in R. In most cases, a short introduction to R programming will be enough. I know
many people have found Emmanuel Paradis’ R for Beginners helpful. You can find it and
many other beginner guides here:
http://cran.r-project.org/other-docs.html
To make use of this book, you should know already that y<-7 stores the value 7 in the sym-
bol y. You should know that symbols which end in parentheses are functions. You should
recognize a loop and understand that commands can be embedded inside other commands
(recursion). Knowing that R vectorizes a lot of code, instead of using loops, is important. But
you don’t have to yet be confident with R programming.
Inevitably you will come across elements of the code in this book that you haven’t seen
before. I have made an effort to explain any particularly important or unusual programming
tricks in my own code. In fact, this book spends a lot of time explaining code. I do this
because students really need it. Unless they can connect each command to the recipe and
the goal, when things go wrong, they won’t know whether it is because of a minor or major
error. The same issue arises when I teach mathematical evolutionary theory—students and
colleagues often suffer from rusty algebra skills, so when they can’t get the right answer, they
often don’t know whether it’s because of some small mathematical misstep or instead some
problem in strategy. The protracted explanations of code in this book aim to build a level of
understanding that allows the reader to diagnose and fix problems.
Why R?. This book uses R for the same reason that it uses English: Lots of people know it
already. R is convenient for doing computational statistics. But many other languages are
just fine. I recommend Python (especially PyMC) and Julia as well. The first edition ended
up with code translations for various languages and styles. Hopefully the second edition will
as well.
Using the code. Code examples in the book are marked by a shaded box, and output from
example code is often printed just beneath a shaded box, but marked by a fixed-width type-
face. For example:
R code
0.1
print( "All models are wrong, but some are useful." )
[1] "All models are wrong, but some are useful."
Next to each snippet of code, you’ll find a number that you can search for in the accompa-
nying code snippet file, available from the book’s website. The intention is that the reader
follow along, executing the code in the shaded boxes and comparing their own output to that
printed in the book. I really want you to execute the code, because just as one cannot learn
martial arts by watching Bruce Lee movies, you can’t learn to program statistical models by
only reading a book. You have to get in there and throw some punches and, likewise, take
some hits.
If you ever get confused, remember that you can execute each line independently and
inspect the intermediate calculations. That’s how you learn as well as solve problems. For
example, here’s a confusing way to multiply the numbers 10 and 20:
