2.1. THE GARDEN OF FORKING DATA
21
one of these paths is taken—murder or tea. But the book within Borges’ story explores all
paths, with each decision branching outward into an expanding garden of forking paths.
This is the same device that Bayesian inference offers. In order to make good inference
about what actually happened, it helps to consider everything that could have happened.
A Bayesian analysis is a garden of forking data, in which alternative sequences of events
are cultivated. As we learn about what did happen, some of these alternative sequences are
pruned. In the end, what remains is only what is logically consistent with our knowledge.
This approach provides a quantitative ranking of hypotheses, a ranking that is maximally
conservative, given the assumptions and data that go into it. The approach cannot guarantee
a correct answer, on large world terms. But it can guarantee the best possible answer, on
small world terms, that could be derived from the information fed into it.
Consider the following toy example.
2.1.1. Counting possibilities. Suppose there’s a bag, and it contains four marbles. These
marbles come in two colors: blue and white. We know there are four marbles in the bag,
but we don’t know how many are of each color. We do know that there are five possibilities:
(1) [
], (2) [
], (3) [
], (4) [
], (5) [
]. These are the only
possibilities consistent with what we know about the contents of the bag. Call these five
possibilities the conjectures.
Our goal is to figure out which of these conjectures is most plausible, given some evi-
dence about the contents of the bag. We do have some evidence: A sequence of three mar-
bles is pulled from the bag, one at a time, replacing the marble each time and shaking the bag
before drawing another marble. The sequence that emerges is:
, in that order. These
are the data.
So now let’s plant the garden and see how to use the data to infer what’s in the bag.
Let’s begin by considering just the single conjecture, [
], that the bag contains one
blue and three white marbles. On the first draw from the bag, one of four things could
happen, corresponding to one of four marbles in the bag. So we can visualize the possibilities
branching outward:
Notice that even though the three white marbles look the same from a data perspective—
we just record the color of the marbles, after all—they are really different events. This is
important, because it means that there are three more ways to see
than to see
.
Now consider the garden as we get another draw from the bag. It expands the garden
out one layer:
Now there are 16 possible paths through the garden, one for each pair of draws. On the
second draw from the bag, each of the paths above again forks into four possible paths. Why?
