1.3. TOOLS FOR GOLEM ENGINEERING
13
branches of applied mathematics. So while everyone subscribes to the same axioms of probability,
not everyone agrees in all contexts about how to interpret probability.
Before moving on to describe the next two tools, it’s worth emphasizing an advantage of
Bayesian data analysis, at least when scholars are learning statistical modeling. This entire
book could be rewritten to remove any mention of “Bayesian.” In places, it would become
easier. In others, it would become much harder. But having taught applied statistics both
ways, I have found that the Bayesian framework presents a distinct pedagogical advantage:
many people find it more intuitive. Perhaps best evidence for this is that very many scientists
interpret non-Bayesian results in Bayesian terms, for example interpreting ordinary p-values
as Bayesian posterior probabilities and non-Bayesian confidence intervals as Bayesian ones
(you’ll learn posterior probability and confidence intervals in Chapters 2 and 3). Even sta-
tistics instructors make these mistakes.26 In this sense then, Bayesian models lead to more
intuitive interpretations, the ones scientists tend to project onto statistical results. The oppo-
site pattern of mistake—interpreting a posterior probability as a p-value—seems to happen
only rarely.
None of this ensures that Bayesian analyses will be more correct than non-Bayesian anal-
yses. It just means that the scientist’s intuitions will less commonly be at odds with the actual
logic of the framework. This simplifies some of the aspects of teaching statistical modeling.
Rethinking: A little history. Bayesian statistical inference is much older than the typical tools of in-
troductory statistics, most of which were developed in the early 20th century. Versions of the Bayesian
approach were applied to scientific work in the late 1700s and repeatedly in the 19th century. But af-
ter World War I, anti-Bayesian statisticians, like Sir Ronald Fisher, succeeded in marginalizing the
approach. All Fisher said about Bayesian analysis (then called inverse probability) in his influential
1925 handbook was:
[...] the theory of inverse probability is founded upon an error, and must be wholly
rejected.27
Bayesian data analysis became increasingly accepted within statistics during the second half of the
20th century, because it proved not to be founded upon an error. All philosophy aside, it worked.
Beginning in the 1990s, new computational approaches led to a rapid rise in application of Bayesian
methods.28 Bayesian methods remain computationally expensive, however. And so as data sets have
increased in scale—millions of rows is common in genomic analysis, for example—alternatives to or
approximations to Bayesian inference remain important, and probably always will.
1.3.2. Model comparison and prediction. Bayesian data analysis provides a way for models
to learn from data. But when there is more than one plausible model—and in most mature
fields there should be—how should we choose among them? One answer is to prefer models
that make good predictions. This answer creates a lot of new questions, since knowing which
model will make the best predictions seems to require knowing the future. We’ll look deeply
at two related tools, neither of which knows the future: cross validation and informa-
tion criteria. These tools aim to let us compare models based upon expected predictive
accuracy.
Comparing models by predictive accuracy can be useful in itself. And it will be even
more useful because it leads to the discovery of an amazing fact: Complex models often make
worse predictions than simpler models. The primary paradox of prediction is overfitting:
Fitting is easy; prediction is hard.29 Future data will not be exactly like past data, and so any
