4.3. GAUSSIAN MODEL OF HEIGHT
81
R code
4.6
w <- 6; n <- 9;
p_grid <- seq(from=0,to=1,length.out=100)
posterior <- dbinom(w,n,p_grid)*dunif(p_grid,0,1)
posterior <- posterior/sum(posterior)
Compare to the calculations in earlier chapters.
4.3. Gaussian model of height
Let’s build a linear regression model now. Well, it’ll be a “regression” once we have a
predictor variable in it. For now, we’ll get the scaffold in place and construct the predictor
variable in the next section.
We’ll work through this material by using real sets of data. In this case, we want a single
measurement variable to model as a Gaussian distribution. There will be two parameters
describing the distribution’s shape, the mean µ and the standard deviation σ. Bayesian up-
dating will allow us to consider every possible combination of values for µ and σ and to score
each combination by its relative plausibility, in light of the data. These relative plausibilities
are the posterior probabilities of each combination of values µ, σ.
Another way to say the above is this. There are an infinite number of possible Gaussian
distributions. Some have small means. Others have large means. Some are wide, with a large
σ. Others are narrow. We want our Bayesian machine to consider every possible distribution,
each defined by a combination of µ and σ, and rank them by posterior plausibility. Posterior
plausibility provides a measure of the logical compatibility of each possible distribution with
the data and model.
In practice we’ll use approximations to the formal analysis. So we won’t really consider
every possible value of µ and σ. But that won’t cost us anything in most cases. Instead the
thing to worry about is keeping in mind that the “estimate” here will be the entire posterior
distribution, not any point within it. And as a result, the posterior distribution will be a
distribution of Gaussian distributions. Yes, a distribution of distributions. If that doesn’t
make sense yet, then that just means you are being honest with yourself. Hold on, work
hard, and it will make plenty of sense before long.
4.3.1. The data. The data contained in data(Howell1) are partial census data for the Dobe
area !Kung San, compiled from interviews conducted by Nancy Howell in the late 1960s.69
For the non-anthropologists reading along, the !Kung San are the most famous foraging
population of the 20th century, largely because of detailed quantitative studies by people like
Howell.
Load the data and place them into a convenient object with:
R code
4.7
library(rethinking)
data(Howell1)
d <- Howell1
What you have now is a data frame named simply d. I use the name d over and over again
in this book to refer to the data frame we are working with at the moment. I keep its name
short to save you typing. A data frame is a special kind of object in R. It is a table with
