1.2. STATISTICAL RETHINKING
7
Unfortunately, other selection models (P1B) imply the same statistical model, MII, as the
neutral model. They also produce power laws. So we’ve reached the uncomfortable lesson:
(1) Any given statistical model (M) may correspond to more than one process model
(P).
(2) Any given hypothesis (H) may correspond to more than one process model (P).
(3) Any given statistical model (M) may correspond to more than one hypothesis (H).
Now look what happens when we compare the statistical models to data. The classical ap-
proach is to take the “neutral” model as a null hypothesis. If the data are not sufficiently
similar to the expectation under the null, then we say that we “reject” the null hypothesis.
Suppose we follow the history of this subject and take P0A as our null hypothesis. This implies
data corresponding to MII. But since the same statistical model corresponds to a selection
model P1B, it’s not at all clear what we are to make of either rejecting or accepting the null.
The null model is not unique to any process model nor hypothesis. If we reject the null,
we can’t really conclude that selection matters, because there are other neutral models that
predict different distributions of alleles. And if we fail to reject the null, we can’t really con-
clude that evolution is neutral, because some selection models expect the same frequency
distribution.
This is a huge bother. Once we have the diagram in Figure 1.2, it’s easy to see the prob-
lem. But few of us are so lucky. While population genetics has recognized this issue, scholars
in other disciplines continue to test frequency distributions against power law expectations,
arguing even that there is only one neutral model.11 Even if there were only one neutral
model, there are so many non-neutral models that mimic the predictions of neutrality, that
neither rejecting nor failing to reject the null model carries much inferential power.
So what can be done? Well, if you have multiple process models, a lot can be done. If
it turns out that all of the process models of interest make very similar predictions, then
you know to search for a different description of the evidence, a description under which
the processes look different. For example, while P0A and P1B make very similar power law
predictions for the frequency distribution of alleles, they make very dissimilar predictions
for the distribution of changes in allele frequency over time. Explicitly compare predictions
of more than one model, and you can save yourself from some ordinary kinds of folly.
Statistical models can be confused in other ways as well, such as the confusion caused by
unobserved variables and sampling bias. Process models allow us to design statistical models
with these problems in mind. The statistical model alone is not enough.
Rethinking: Entropy and model identification. One reason that statistical models routinely corre-
spond to many different detailed process models is because they rely upon distributions like the nor-
mal, binomial, Poisson, and others. These distributions are members of a family, the exponential
family. Nature loves the members of this family. Nature loves them because nature loves entropy,
and all of the exponential family distributions are maximum entropy distributions. Taking the nat-
ural personification out of that explanation will wait until Chapter 10. The practical implication is
that one can no more infer evolutionary process from a power law than one can infer developmental
process from the fact that height is normally distributed. This fact should make us humble about what
typical regression models—the meat of this book—can teach us about mechanistic process. On the
other hand, the maximum entropy nature of these distributions means we can use them to do useful
statistical work, even when we can’t identify the underlying process. Not only can we not identify it,
but we don’t have to.
