xii
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
well a more direct discussion of causal inference. This means that DAGs—directed acyclic
graphs—make an appearance. The chapter on overfitting, Chapter 7 now, is also more di-
rect in cautioning about the predictive nature of information criteria and cross-validation.
Cross-validation and importance sampling approximations of it (PSIS-LOO) are now dis-
cussed explicitly.
Now model types. Chapter 4 now ends with B-splines. The chapter on count models, Chap-
ter 11, now includes an item-response (factor analytic) example. Chapter 12 contains a sur-
vival analysis with censoring. Chapter 14 has an example of a phylogenetic distance regres-
sion. And there is an entirely new chapter, Chapter 16, that focuses on models that are not
easily conceived of as GLMMs.
Some new data examples. There are some new data examples, such as the Japanese cherry
blossoms historical time series and a larger primate evolution data set with 300 species and
a matching phylogeny.
More presentation of raw Stan models. There are several places now where raw Stan model
code is explained, inside optional boxes. I hope this makes a transition to working directly
in Stan easier. But the main text remains R script, using the rethinking package’s teaching
tools.
Kindness and persistence. As in the first edition, I have tried to make the material as kind as
possible. None of this stuff is easy, and the journey into understanding is long and haunted.
It is important that readers expect that confusion and partial understanding are normal. This
is also the reason that I have not changed the basic modeling strategy in the book.
First, I force the reader to explicitly specify every assumption of the model. Some readers
of the first edition lobbied me to use simplified formula tools like brms or rstanarm. Those
are fantastic packages, and graduating to use them after this book is recommended. But
I don’t see how a person can come to understand the model when using those tools. The
priors being hidden isn’t the most limiting part. Instead, since linear model formulas like
y ~ (1|x) + z don’t show the parameters, nor even all of the terms, it is not easy to see
how the mathematical model relates to the code. It is ultimately kinder to be a bit cruel and
require more work. So the formula lists remain. In this book, you are programming the log-
posterior, down to the exact relationship between each variable and coefficient. You’ll thank
me later.
Second, half the book goes by before MCMC appears. Some readers of the first edition
wanted me to start instead with MCMC. I do not do this because Bayes is not about MCMC.
We seek the posterior distribution, but there are many legitimate approximations of it, and
MCMC is just one set of strategies. Using quadratic approximation in the first half also allows
a clearer tie to non-Bayesian algorithms. And since finding the quadratic approximation is
fast, it means readers don’t have to struggle with too many things at once. Again, it is about
being kind.
Richard McElreath
Leipzig, 10 August 2019
