3.3. SAMPLING TO SIMULATE PREDICTION
65
distribution. We lose this information when we pluck out a single parameter value and then
perform calculations with it. This loss of information leads to overconfidence.
Let’s do some basic model checks, using simulated observations for the globe tossing
model. The observations in our example case are counts of water, over tosses of the globe.
The implied predictions of the model are uncertain in two ways, and it’s important to be
aware of both.
First, there is observation uncertainty. For any unique value of the parameter p, there
is a unique implied pattern of observations that the model expects. These patterns of ob-
servations are the same gardens of forking data that you explored in the previous chapter.
These patterns are also what you sampled in the previous section. There is uncertainty in the
predicted observations, because even if you know p with certainty, you won’t know the next
globe toss with certainty (unless p = 0 or p = 1).
Second, there is uncertainty about p. The posterior distribution over p embodies this
uncertainty. And since there is uncertainty about p, there is uncertainty about everything
that depends upon p. The uncertainty in p will interact with the sampling variation, when
we try to assess what the model tells us about outcomes.
We’d like to propagate the parameter uncertainty—carry it forward—as we evaluate the
implied predictions. All that is required is averaging over the posterior density for p, while
computing the predictions. For each possible value of the parameter p, there is an implied
distribution of outcomes. So if you were to compute the sampling distribution of outcomes at
each value of p, then you could average all of these prediction distributions together, using the
posterior probabilities of each value of p, to get a posterior predictive distribution.
Figure 3.6 illustrates this averaging. At the top, the posterior distribution is shown,
with 10 unique parameter values highlighted by the vertical lines. The implied distribution
of observations specific to each of these parameter values is shown in the middle row of
plots. Observations are never certain for any value of p, but they do shift around in response
to it. Finally, at the bottom, the sampling distributions for all values of p are combined,
using the posterior probabilities to compute the weighted average frequency of each possible
observation, zero to nine water samples.
The resulting distribution is for predictions, but it incorporates all of the uncertainty
embodied in the posterior distribution for the parameter p. As a result, it is honest. While
the model does a good job of predicting the data—the most likely observation is indeed
the observed data—predictions are still quite spread out. If instead you were to use only a
single parameter value to compute implied predictions, say the most probable value at the
peak of posterior distribution, you’d produce an overconfident distribution of predictions,
narrower than the posterior predictive distribution in Figure 3.6 and more like the sampling
distribution shown for p = 0.6 in the middle row. The usual effect of this overconfidence
will be to lead you to believe that the model is more consistent with the data than it really is—
the predictions will cluster around the observations more tightly. This illusion arises from
tossing away uncertainty about the parameters.
So how do you actually do the calculations? To simulate predicted observations for a
single value of p, say p = 0.6, you can use rbinom to generate random binomial samples:
R code
3.25
w <- rbinom( 1e4 , size=9 , prob=0.6 )
This generates 10,000 (1e4) simulated predictions of 9 globe tosses (size=9), assuming p =
0.6. The predictions are stored as counts of water, so the theoretical minimum is zero and the
