66
3. SAMPLING THE IMAGINARY
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
probability of water
0
0.5
1
number of water samples
0
3
6
9
Posterior probability
Sampling distributions
Posterior predictive 
distribution
Figure 3.6. Simulating predictions from the total posterior. Top: The fa-
miliar posterior distribution for the globe tossing data. Ten example pa-
rameter values are marked by the vertical lines. Values with greater poste-
rior probability indicated by thicker lines. Middle row: Each of the ten pa-
rameter values implies a unique sampling distribution of predictions. Bot-
tom: Combining simulated observation distributions for all parameter val-
ues (not just the ten shown), each weighted by its posterior probability, pro-
duces the posterior predictive distribution. This distribution propagates un-
certainty about parameter to uncertainty about prediction.
theoretical maximum is nine. You can use simplehist(w) (in the rethinking package) to
get a clean histogram of your simulated outcomes.
All you need to propagate parameter uncertainty into these predictions is replace the
value 0.6 with samples from the posterior:
R code
3.26
w <- rbinom( 1e4 , size=9 , prob=samples )
The symbol samples above is the same list of random samples from the posterior distribu-
tion that you’ve used in previous sections. For each sampled value, a random binomial obser-
vation is generated. Since the sampled values appear in proportion to their posterior proba-
bilities, the resulting simulated observations are averaged over the posterior. You can manip-
ulate these simulated observations just like you manipulate samples from the posterior—you
can compute intervals and point statistics using the same procedures. If you plot these sam-
ples, you’ll see the distribution shown in the right-hand plot in Figure 3.6.
The simulated model predictions are quite consistent with the observed data in this
case—the actual count of 6 lies right in the middle of the simulated distribution. There is
