3.3. SAMPLING TO SIMULATE PREDICTION
61
So what are we to learn from all of this? In order to decide upon a point estimate, a
single-value summary of the posterior distribution, we need to pick a loss function. Different
loss functions nominate different point estimates. The two most common examples are the
absolute loss as above, which leads to the median as the point estimate, and the quadratic
loss (d −p)2, which leads to the posterior mean (mean(samples)) as the point estimate.
When the posterior distribution is symmetrical and normal-looking, then the median and
mean converge to the same point, which relaxes some anxiety we might have about choosing
a loss function. For the original globe tossing data (6 waters in 9 tosses), for example, the
mean and median are barely different.
In principle, though, the details of the applied context may demand a rather unique loss
function. Consider a practical example like deciding whether or not to order an evacuation,
based upon an estimate of hurricane wind speed. Damage to life and property increases
very rapidly as wind speed increases. There are also costs to ordering an evacuation when
none is needed, but these are much smaller. Therefore the implied loss function is highly
asymmetric, rising sharply as true wind speed exceeds our guess, but rising only slowly as
true wind speed falls below our guess. In this context, the optimal point estimate would tend
to be larger than posterior mean or median. Moreover, the real issue is whether or not to
order an evacuation, and so producing a point estimate of wind speed may not be necessary
at all.
Usually, research scientists don’t think about loss functions. And so any point estimate
like the mean or MAP that they may report isn’t intended to support any particular decision,
but rather to describe the shape of the posterior. You might argue that the decision to make
is whether or not to accept an hypothesis. But the challenge then is to say what the relevant
costs and benefits would be, in terms of the knowledge gained or lost.60 Usually it’s better
to communicate as much as you can about the posterior distribution, as well as the data and
the model itself, so that others can build upon your work. Premature decisions to accept or
reject hypotheses can cost lives.61
It’s healthy to keep these issues in mind, if only because they remind us that many of
the routine questions in statistical inference can only be answered under consideration of a
particular empirical context and applied purpose. Statisticians can provide general outlines
and standard answers, but a motivated and attentive scientist will always be able to improve
upon such general advice.
3.3. Sampling to simulate prediction
Another common job for samples is to ease simulation of the model’s implied obser-
vations. Generating implied observations from a model is useful for at least four distinct
reasons.
(1) Model design. We can sample not only from the posterior, but also from the prior.
Seeing what the model expects, before the data arrive, is the best way to understand
the implications of the prior. We’ll do a lot of this in later chapters, where there will
be multiple parameters and so their joint implications are not always very clear.
(2) Model checking. After a model is updated using data, it is worth simulating im-
plied observations, to check both whether the fit worked correctly and to investi-
gate model behavior.
(3) Software validation. In order to be sure that our model fitting software is working,
it helps to simulate observations under a known model and then attempt to recover
the values of the parameters the data were simulated under.
