3.2. SAMPLING TO SUMMARIZE
59
value with highest posterior probability, a maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate. You can
easily compute the MAP in this example:
R code
3.14
p_grid[ which.max(posterior) ]
[1] 1
Or if you instead have samples from the posterior, you can still approximate the same point:
R code
3.15
chainmode( samples , adj=0.01 )
[1] 0.9985486
But why is this point, the mode, interesting? Why not report the posterior mean or median?
R code
3.16
mean( samples )
median( samples )
[1] 0.8005558
[1] 0.8408408
These are also point estimates, and they also summarize the posterior. But all three—the
mode (MAP), mean, and median—are different in this case. How can we choose among
them? Figure 3.4 shows this posterior distribution and the locations of these point sum-
maries.
One principled way to go beyond using the entire posterior as the estimate is to choose
a loss function. A loss function is a rule that tells you the cost associated with using any
particular point estimate. While statisticians and game theorists have long been interested
in loss functions, and how Bayesian inference supports them, scientists hardly ever use them
explicitly. The key insight is that different loss functions imply different point estimates.
Here’s an example to help us work through the procedure. Suppose I offer you a bet. Tell
me which value of p, the proportion of water on the Earth, you think is correct. I will pay
you $100, if you get it exactly right. But I will subtract money from your gain, proportional
to the distance of your decision from the correct value. Precisely, your loss is proportional
to the absolute value of d −p, where d is your decision and p is the correct answer. We could
change the precise dollar values involved, without changing the important aspects of this
problem. What matters is that the loss is proportional to the distance of your decision from
the true value.
Now once you have the posterior distribution in hand, how should you use it to maxi-
mize your expected winnings? It turns out that the parameter value that maximizes expected
winnings (minimizes expected loss) is the median of the posterior distribution. Let’s calcu-
late that fact, without using a mathematical proof. Those interested in the proof should follow
the endnote.59
Calculating expected loss for any given decision means using the posterior to average
over our uncertainty in the true value. Of course we don’t know the true value, in most
cases. But if we are going to use our model’s information about the parameter, that means
using the entire posterior distribution. So suppose we decide p = 0.5 will be our decision.
Then the expected loss will be:
