1.4. SUMMARY
17
comparing models on the basis of predictive accuracy—or p-values or anything else—will
not necessarily produce it.
So what can be done? What is needed is a causal model that can be used to design one or
more statistical models for the purpose of causal identification. As I mentioned in the neu-
tral molecular evolution example earlier in this chapter, a complete scientific model contains
more information than a statistical model derived from it. And this additional information
contains causal implications. Most scientists make informal use of these implications. But it
is also possible to make formal use of them, demonstrating logically when an estimate iden-
tifies a causal relationship. These formal methods date from the first half of the 20th century,
but they have more recently been extended to the study of measurement, experimental de-
sign, and the ability to generalize (or transport) results across samples.34
And the very good news is that even when you don’t have a complete causal model, but
only a heuristic one indicating which variables causally influence others, you can still make
use of these logical tools. That is the strategy we will use in this book. We’ll use a graphical
causal model to represent a causal hypothesis. The simplest graphical causal model is a
directed acyclic graph, usually called a DAG. DAGs are heuristic—they are not detailed
statistical models. But they allow us to deduce which statistical models can provide valid
causal inferences, assuming the DAG is true. You don’t need to understand this right now.
The later chapters build DAGs up through examples.
But where does a DAG itself come from? The terrible truth about statistical inference
is that its validity relies upon information outside the data. We require a causal model with
which to design both the collection of data and the structure of our statistical models. But
the construction of causal models is not a purely statistical endeavor, and statistical analysis
can never verify all of our assumptions. There will never be a golem that accepts naked data
and returns a reliable model of the causal relations among the variables. We’re just going to
have to keep doing science.
Rethinking: Causal salad. Causal inference requires a causal model that is separate from the statis-
tical model. The data are not enough. Every philosophy agrees upon that much. Responses however
are diverse. The most conservative response is to declare “causation” to be unprovable mental candy,
like debating the nature of the afterlife.35 Slightly less conservative is to insist that cause can only be
inferred under strict conditions of randomization and experimental control. This would be very lim-
iting. Many scientific questions can never be studied experimentally—human evolution, for example.
Many others could in principle be studied experimentally, but it would be unethical to do so. And
many experiments are really just attempts at control—patients do not always take their medication.
But the approach which dominates in many parts of biology and the social sciences is instead
causal salad.36 Causal salad means tossing various “control” variables into a statistical model,
observing changes in estimates, and then telling a story about causation. Causal salad seems founded
on the notion that only omitted variables can mislead us about causation. But included variables can
just as easily confound us. When tossing a causal salad, a model that makes good predictions may still
mislead about causation. If we use the model to plan an intervention, it will get everything wrong.
There will be examples in later chapters.
1.4. Summary
This first chapter has argued for a rethinking of popular statistical and scientific phi-
losophy. Instead of choosing among various black-box tools for testing null hypotheses,
we should learn to build and analyze multiple non-null models of natural phenomena. To
