36
2. SMALL WORLDS AND LARGE WORLDS
between certainty (data) and uncertainty (parameters) to incorporate measurement error and missing
data into your modeling.
Rethinking: Prior, prior pants on fire. Historically, some opponents of Bayesian inference objected
to the arbitrariness of priors. It’s true that priors are very flexible, being able to encode many different
states of information. If the prior can be anything, isn’t it possible to get any answer you want? Indeed
it is. Regardless, after a couple hundred years of Bayesian calculation, it hasn’t turned out that people
use priors to lie. If your goal is to lie with statistics, you’d be a fool to do it with priors, because such a
lie would be easily uncovered. Better to use the more opaque machinery of the likelihood. Or better
yet—don’t actually take this advice!—massage the data, drop some “outliers,” and otherwise engage
in motivated data transformation.
It is true though that choice of the likelihood is much more conventionalized than choice of prior.
But conventional choices are often poor ones, smuggling in influences that can be hard to discover.
In this regard, both Bayesian and non-Bayesian models are equally harried, because both traditions
depend heavily upon likelihood functions and conventionalized model forms. And the fact that the
non-Bayesian procedure doesn’t have to make an assumption about the prior is of little comfort. This
is because non-Bayesian procedures need to make choices that Bayesian ones do not, such as choice of
estimator or likelihood penalty. Often, such choices can be shown to be equivalent to some Bayesian
choice of prior or rather choice of loss function. (You’ll meet loss functions later in Chapter 3.)
2.3.3. A model is born. With all the above work, we can now summarize out model. The
observed variables W and L are given relative counts through the binomial distribution. So
we can write, as a shortcut:
W ∼Binomial(N, p)
where N = W + L. The above is just a convention for communicating the assumption that
the relative counts of ways to realize W in N trials with probability p on each trial comes from
the binomial distribution. And the unobserved parameter p similarly gets:
p ∼Uniform(0, 1)
This means that p has a uniform—flat—prior over its entire possible range, from zero to one.
As I mentioned earlier, this is obviously not the best we could do, since we know the Earth
has more water than land, even if we do not know the exact proportion yet.
Next, let’s see how to use these assumptions to generate inference.
2.4. Making the model go
Once you have named all the variables and chosen definitions for each, a Bayesian model
can update all of the prior distributions to their purely logical consequences: the posterior
distribution. For every unique combination of data, likelihood, parameters, and prior,
there is a unique posterior distribution. This distribution contains the relative plausibility
of different parameter values, conditional on the data and model. The posterior distribution
takes the form of the probability of the parameters, conditional on the data. This case, it
would be Pr(p|W, L), the probability of each possible value of p, conditional on the specific
W and L that we observed.
