54
3. SAMPLING THE IMAGINARY
[1] 0.1718746
So about 17% of the posterior probability is below 0.5. Couldn’t be easier. But since grid ap-
proximation isn’t practical in general, it won’t always be so easy. Once there is more than one
parameter in the posterior distribution (wait until the next chapter for that complication),
even this simple sum is no longer very simple.
So let’s see how to perform the same calculation, using samples from the posterior. This
approach does generalize to complex models with many parameters, and so you can use
it everywhere. All you have to do is similarly add up all of the samples below 0.5, but also
divide the resulting count by the total number of samples. In other words, find the frequency
of parameter values below 0.5:
R code
3.7
sum( samples < 0.5 ) / 1e4
[1] 0.1726
And that’s nearly the same answer as the grid approximation provided, although your answer
will not be exactly the same, because the exact samples you drew from the posterior will be
different. This region is shown in the upper-left plot in Figure 3.2. Using the same approach,
you can ask how much posterior probability lies between 0.5 and 0.75:
R code
3.8
sum( samples > 0.5 & samples < 0.75 ) / 1e4
[1] 0.6059
So about 61% of the posterior probability lies between 0.5 and 0.75. This region is shown in
the upper-right plot of Figure 3.2.
Overthinking: Counting with sum. In the R code examples just above, I used the function sum
to effectively count up how many samples fulfill a logical criterion. Why does this work? It works
because R internally converts a logical expression, like samples < 0.5, to a vector of TRUE and FALSE
results, one for each element of samples, saying whether or not each element matches the criterion.
Go ahead and enter samples < 0.5 on the R prompt, to see this for yourself. Then when you sum
this vector of TRUE and FALSE, R counts each TRUE as 1 and each FALSE as 0. So it ends up counting
how many TRUE values are in the vector, which is the same as the number of elements in samples
that match the logical criterion.
3.2.2. Intervals of defined mass. It is more common to see scientific journals reporting
an interval of defined mass, usually known as a confidence interval. An interval of
posterior probability, such as the ones we are working with, may instead be called a credible
interval. We’re going to call it a compatibility interval instead, in order to avoid the
unwarranted implications of “confidence” and “credibility.”53 What the interval indicates
is a range of parameter values compatible with the model and data. The model and data
themselves may not inspire confidence, in which case the interval will not either.
These posterior intervals report two parameter values that contain between them a spec-
ified amount of posterior probability, a probability mass. For this type of interval, it is easier
to find the answer by using samples from the posterior than by using a grid approximation.
