80
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
We won’t do any mathematical manipulation of them. Instead, they provide an unambigu-
ous way to define and communicate our models. Once you get comfortable with their gram-
mar, when you start reading these mathematical descriptions in other books or in scientific
journals, you’ll find them less obtuse.
The approach above surely isn’t the only way to describe statistical modeling, but it is a
widespread and productive language. Once a scientist learns this language, it becomes easier
to communicate the assumptions of our models. We no longer have to remember seemingly
arbitrary lists of bizarre conditions like homoscedasticity (constant variance), because we can
just read these conditions from the model definitions. We will also be able to see natural ways
to change these assumptions, instead of feeling trapped within some procrustean model type,
like regression or multiple regression or ANOVA or ANCOVA or such. These are all the
same kind of model, and that fact becomes obvious once we know how to talk about models
as mappings of one set of variables through a probability distribution onto another set of
variables. Fundamentally, these models define the ways values of some variables can arise,
given values of other variables (Chapter 2).
4.2.1. Re-describing the globe tossing model. It’s good to work with examples. Recall the
proportion of water problem from previous chapters. The model in that case was always:
W ∼Binomial(N, p)
p ∼Uniform(0, 1)
where W was the observed count of water, N was the total number of tosses, and p was the
proportion of water on the globe. Read the above statement as:
The count W is distributed binomially with sample size N and probability p.
The prior for p is assumed to be uniform between zero and one.
Once we know the model in this way, we automatically know all of its assumptions. We
know the binomial distribution assumes that each sample (globe toss) is independent of the
others, and so we also know that the model assumes that sample points are independent of
one another.
For now, we’ll focus on simple models like the above. In these models, the first line de-
fines the likelihood function used in Bayes’ theorem. The other lines define priors. Both of
the lines in this model are stochastic, as indicated by the ∼symbol. A stochastic relation-
ship is just a mapping of a variable or parameter onto a distribution. It is stochastic because
no single instance of the variable on the left is known with certainty. Instead, the mapping is
probabilistic: Some values are more plausible than others, but very many different values are
plausible under any model. Later, we’ll have models with deterministic definitions in them
as well.
Overthinking: From model definition to Bayes’ theorem. To relate the mathematical format above
to Bayes’ theorem, you could use the model definition to define the posterior distribution:
Pr(p|w, n) =
Binomial(w|n, p)Uniform(p|0, 1)
R
Binomial(w|n, p)Uniform(p|0, 1)dp
That monstrous denominator is just the average likelihood again. It standardizes the posterior to sum
to 1. The action is in the numerator, where the posterior probability of any particular value of p is
seen again to be proportional to the product of the likelihood and prior. In R code form, this is the
same grid approximation calculation you’ve been using all along. In a form recognizable as the above
expression:
