4.3. GAUSSIAN MODEL OF HEIGHT
83
chapter, I’ll ask you to tackle the age problem. But for now, better to postpone it. You can
filter the data frame down to individuals of age 18 or greater with:
R code
4.11
d2 <- d[ d$age >= 18 , ]
We’ll be working with the data frame d2 now. It should have 352 rows (individuals) in it.
Overthinking: Index magic. The square bracket notation used in the code above is index notation.
It is very powerful, but also quite compact and confusing. The data frame d is a matrix, a rectangular
grid of values. You can access any value in the matrix with d[row,col], replacing row and col with
row and column numbers. If row or col are lists of numbers, then you get more than one row or
column. If you leave the spot for row or col blank, then you get all of whatever you leave blank. For
example, d[ 3 , ] gives all columns at row 3. Typing d[,] just gives you the entire matrix, because
it returns all rows and all columns.
So what d[ d$age >= 18 , ] does is give you all of the rows in which d$age is greater-than-
or-equal-to 18. It also gives you all of the columns, because the spot after the comma is blank. The
result is stored in d2, the new data frame containing only adults. With a little practice, you can use
this square bracket index notion to perform custom searches of your data, much like performing a
database query.
4.3.2. The model. Our goal is to model these values using a Gaussian distribution. First, go
ahead and plot the distribution of heights, with dens(d2$height). These data look rather
Gaussian in shape, as is typical of height data. This may be because height is a sum of many
small growth factors. As you saw at the start of the chapter, a distribution of sums tends
to converge to a Gaussian distribution. Whatever the reason, adult heights from a single
population are nearly always approximately normal.
So it’s reasonable for the moment to adopt the stance that the model should use a Gauss-
ian distribution for the probability distribution of the data. But be careful about choosing
the Gaussian distribution only when the plotted outcome variable looks Gaussian to you.
Gawking at the raw data, to try to decide how to model them, is usually not a good idea. The
data could be a mixture of different Gaussian distributions, for example, and in that case
you won’t be able to detect the underlying normality just by eyeballing the outcome distribu-
tion. Furthermore, as mentioned earlier in this chapter, the empirical distribution needn’t
be actually Gaussian in order to justify using a Gaussian probability distribution.
So which Gaussian distribution? There are an infinite number of them, with an infinite
number of different means and standard deviations. We’re ready to write down the general
model and compute the plausibility of each combination of µ and σ. To define the heights
as normally distributed with a mean µ and standard deviation σ, we write:
hi ∼Normal(µ, σ)
In many books you’ll see the same model written as hi ∼N(µ, σ), which means the same
thing. The symbol h refers to the list of heights, and the subscript i means each individual
element of this list. It is conventional to use i because it stands for index. The index i takes on
row numbers, and so in this example can take any value from 1 to 352 (the number of heights
in d2$height). As such, the model above is saying that all the golem knows about each
height measurement is defined by the same normal distribution, with mean µ and standard
deviation σ. Before long, those little i’s are going to show up on the right-hand side of the
