2.1. THE GARDEN OF FORKING DATA
23
Figure 2.3. After eliminating paths inconsistent with the observed se-
quence, only 3 of the 64 paths remain.
and two white marbles. Now we count up all of the ways each conjecture could produce the
observed data. For one blue and three white, there are three ways, as we counted already. For
two blue and two white, there are eight paths forking through the garden that are logically
consistent with the observed sequence. For three blue and one white, there are nine paths
that survive.
To summarize, we’ve considered five different conjectures about the contents of the bag,
ranging from zero blue marbles to four blue marbles. For each of these conjectures, we’ve
counted up how many sequences, paths through the garden of forking data, could potentially
produce the observed data,
:
Conjecture
Ways to produce
[
]
0 × 4 × 0 = 0
[
]
1 × 3 × 1 = 3
[
]
2 × 2 × 2 = 8
[
]
3 × 1 × 3 = 9
[
]
4 × 0 × 4 = 0
Notice that the number of ways to produce the data, for each conjecture, can be computed
by first counting the number of paths in each “ring” of the garden and then by multiplying
these counts together. This is just a computational device. It tells us the same thing as Fig-
ure 2.4, but without having to draw the garden. The fact that numbers are multiplied during
calculation doesn’t change the fact that this is still just counting of logically possible paths.
This point will come up again, when you meet the more formal representation of Bayesian
inference.
So what good are these counts? By comparing these counts, we have part of a solution
for a way to rate the relative plausibility of each conjectured bag composition. But it’s only a
part of a solution, because in order to compare these counts we first have to decide how many
ways each conjecture could itself be realized. We might argue that when we have no reason
to assume otherwise, we can just consider each conjecture equally plausible and compare the
counts directly. But often we do have reason to assume otherwise.
