4 Geocentric Models
History has been unkind to Ptolemy. Claudius Ptolemy (born 90 CE, died 168 CE) was
an Egyptian mathematician and astronomer, most famous for his geocentric model of the
solar system. These days, when scientists wish to mock someone, they might compare him
to a supporter of the geocentric model. But Ptolemy was a genius. His mathematical model
of the motions of the planets (Figure 4.1) was extremely accurate. To achieve its accuracy,
it employed a device known as an epicycle, a circle on a circle. It is even possible to have epi-
epicycles, circles on circles on circles. With enough epicycles in the right places, Ptolemy’s
model could predict with accuracy greater than anyone had achieved before him. And so
the model was utilized for over a thousand years. And Ptolemy and people like him, toiling
over centuries, worked it all out without the aid of a computer. Anyone should be flattered
to be compared to Ptolemy.
The trouble of course is that the geocentric model is wrong, in many respects. If you
used it to plot the path of your Mars probe, you’d miss the red planet by quite a distance.
But for spotting Mars in the night sky, it remains an excellent model. It would have to be
re-calibrated every century or so, depending upon which heavenly body you wish to locate.
But the geocentric model continues to make useful predictions, provided those predictions
remain within a narrow domain of questioning.
The strategy of using epicycles might seem crazy, once you know the correct structure
of the solar system. But it turns out that the ancients had hit upon a generalized system of
approximation. Given enough circles embedded in enough places, the Ptolemaic strategy is
the same as a Fourier series, a way of decomposing a periodic function (like an orbit) into
a series of sine and cosine functions. So no matter the actual arrangement of planets and
moons, a geocentric model can be built to describe their paths against the night sky.
Linear regression is the geocentric model of applied statistics. By “linear regression,”
we will mean a family of simple statistical golems that attempt to learn about the mean and
variance of some measurement, using an additive combination of other measurements. Like
geocentrism, linear regression can usefully describe a very large variety of natural phenom-
ena. Like geocentrism, linear regression is a descriptive model that corresponds to many
different process models. If we read its structure too literally, we’re likely to make mistakes.
But used wisely, these little linear golems continue to be useful.
This chapter introduces linear regression as a Bayesian procedure. Under a probability
interpretation, which is necessary for Bayesian work, linear regression uses a Gaussian (nor-
mal) distribution to describe our golem’s uncertainty about some measurement of interest.
This type of model is simple, flexible, and commonplace. Like all statistical models, it is
not universally useful. But linear regression has a strong claim to being foundational, in the
73
