Preface to the Second Edition
It came as a complete surprise to me that I wrote a statistics book. It is even more sur-
prising how popular the book has become. But I had set out to write the statistics book that
I wish I could have had in graduate school. No one should have to learn this stuff the way I
did. I am glad there is an audience to benefit from the book.
It consumed 5 years to write it. There was an initial set of course notes, melted down and
hammered into a first 200 page manuscript. I discarded that first manuscript. But it taught
me the outline of the book I really wanted to write. Then several years of teaching with the
manuscript further refined it.
Really I could have continued refining it every year. Going to press carries the penalty of
freezing a dynamic process of both learning how to teach the material and keeping up with
changes in the material. As time goes on, I see more elements of the book that I wish I had
done differently. I’ve also received a lot of feedback on the book, and that feedback has given
me ideas for improving it.
So in the second edition, I put those ideas into action. The goal with a second edition is
only to refine the strategy that made the first edition a success. The major changes are:
The R package has some new tools. The map tool from the first edition is still here, but now
it is named quap. This renaming is just to avoid misunderstanding. We just used it to get a
quadratic approximation to the posterior. So now is named as such. A bigger change is that
map2stan has been replaced by ulam. The new ulam is very similar to map2stan, and in
many cases can be used identically. But it is also much more flexible, mainly because it does
not make any assumptions about GLM structure and allows explicit variable types within
the formula list. All the map2stan code is still in the package and will continue to work.
But now ulam allows for much more, especially in later chapters. Both of these tools allow
sampling from the prior distribution, using extract.prior, as well as the posterior. This
helps with the next change.
Much more prior predictive simulation. A prior predictive simulation means simulating
predictions from a model, using only the prior distribution instead of the posterior distri-
bution. This is very useful for understanding the implications of a prior. There was only a
vestigial amount of this in the first edition. Now most modeling examples have some prior
predictive simulation. I think this is most useful addition to the second edition, since it helps
so much with understanding not only priors but also the model itself.
More emphasis on the distinction between prediction and inference. Chapter 5, the chap-
ter on multiple regression, has been split into two chapters. The first chapter focuses on
helpful aspects of regression. The second focuses on ways that it can mislead. This allows as
xi
