xiv
PREFACE
them, in the wilds of the sciences, as well as the exclusion of so many other useful tools. So
the book assumes the reader is ready to try doing statistical inference without p-values. This
isn’t the ideal situation. It would be better to have material that helps you spot common mis-
takes and misunderstandings of p-values and tests in general, as all of us have to understand
such things, even if we don’t use them. So I’ve tried to sneak in a little material of that kind,
but unfortunately cannot devote much space to it. The book would be too long, and it would
disrupt the teaching flow of the material.
It’s important to realize, however, that the disregard paid to p-values is not a uniquely
Bayesian attitude. Indeed, significance testing can be—and has been—formulated as a Bayes-
ian procedure as well. So the choice to avoid significance testing is stimulated instead by
epistemological concerns, some of which are briefly discussed in the first chapter.
Teaching strategy
The book uses much more computer code than formal mathematics. Even excellent
mathematicians can have trouble understanding an approach, until they see a working algo-
rithm. This is because implementation in code form removes all ambiguities. So material of
this sort is easier to learn, if you also learn how to implement it.
In addition to any pedagogical value of presenting code, so much of statistics is now com-
putational that a purely mathematical approach is anyways insufficient. As you’ll see in later
parts of this book, the same mathematical statistical model can sometimes be implemented
in different ways, and the differences matter. So when you move beyond this book to more
advanced or specialized statistical modeling, the computational emphasis here will help you
recognize and cope with all manner of practical troubles.
Every section of the book is really just the tip of an iceberg. I’ve made no attempt to be
exhaustive. Rather I’ve tried to explain something well. In this attempt, I’ve woven a lot of
concepts and material into data analysis examples. So instead of having traditional units on,
for example, centering predictor variables, I’ve developed those concepts in the context of a
narrative about data analysis. This is certainly not a style that works for all readers. But it
has worked for a lot of my students. I suspect it fails dramatically for those who are being
forced to learn this information. For the internally motivated, it reflects how we really learn
these skills in the context of our research.
How to use this book
This book is not a reference, but a course. It doesn’t try to support random access.
Rather, it expects sequential access. This has immense pedagogical advantages, but it has
the disadvantage of violating how most scientists actually read books.
This book has a lot of code in it, integrated fully into the main text. The reason for this
is that doing model-based statistics in the 21st century really requires programming, of at
least a minor sort. The code is not optional. Everyplace, I have erred on the side of including
too much code, rather than too little. In my experience teaching scientific programming,
novices learn more quickly when they have working code to modify, rather than needing to
write an algorithm from scratch. My generation was probably the last to have to learn some
programming to use a computer, and so coding has gotten harder and harder to teach as
time goes on. My students are very computer literate, but they sometimes have no idea what
computer code looks like.
