34
2. SMALL WORLDS AND LARGE WORLDS
R code
2.2
dbinom( 6 , size=9 , prob=0.5 )
[1] 0.1640625
That number is the relative number of ways to get six water, holding p at 0.5 and N = W + L
at nine. So it does the job of counting relative number of paths through the garden. Change
the 0.5 to any other value, to see how the value changes.
Much later in the book, in Chapter 10, we’ll see that the binomial distribution is rather
special, because it represents the maximum entropy way to count binary events. “Maxi-
mum entropy” might sound like a bad thing. Isn’t entropy disorder? Doesn’t “maximum
entropy” mean the death of the universe? Actually it means that the distribution contains
no additional information other than: There are two events, and the probabilities of each
in each trial are p and 1 −p. Chapter 10 explains this in more detail, and the details can
certainly wait.
Overthinking: Names and probability distributions. The “d” in dbinom stands for density. Func-
tions named in this way almost always have corresponding partners that begin with “r” for random
samples and that begin with “p” for cumulative probabilities. See for example the help ?dbinom.
Rethinking: A central role for likelihood. A great deal of ink has been spilled focusing on how
Bayesian and non-Bayesian data analyses differ. Focusing on differences is useful, but sometimes
it distracts us from fundamental similarities. Notably, the most influential assumptions in both
Bayesian and many non-Bayesian models are the distributions assigned to data, the likelihood func-
tions. The likelihoods influence inference for every piece of data, and as sample size increases, the
likelihood matters more and more. This helps to explain why Bayesian and non-Bayesian inferences
are often so similar. If we had to define “Bayesian” using only one aspect of it, we should describe
likelihood, not priors.
2.3.2.2. Unobserved variables. The distributions we assign to the observed variables typ-
ically have their own variables. In the binomial above, there is p, the probability of sampling
water. Since p is not observed, we usually call it a parameter. Even though we cannot
observe p, we still have to define it.
In future chapters, there will be more parameters in your models. In statistical modeling,
many of the most common questions we ask about data are answered directly by parameters:
• What is the average difference between treatment groups?
• How strong is the association between a treatment and an outcome?
• Does the effect of the treatment depend upon a covariate?
• How much variation is there among groups?
You’ll see how these questions become extra parameters inside the distribution function we
assign to the data.
For every parameter you intend your Bayesian machine to consider, you must provide a
distribution of prior plausibility, its prior. A Bayesian machine must have an initial plausi-
bility assignment for each possible value of the parameter, and these initial assignments do
useful work. When you have a previous estimate to provide to the machine, that can become
the prior, as in the steps in Figure 2.5. Back in Figure 2.5, the machine did its learning one
piece of data at a time. As a result, each estimate becomes the prior for the next step. But this
