78
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
assumption to make. In this way, the Gaussian is the distribution most consistent with our
assumptions. Or rather, it is the most consistent with our golem’s assumptions. If you don’t
think the distribution should be Gaussian, then that implies that you know something else
that you should tell your golem about, something that would improve inference.
This epistemological justification is premised on information theory and maximum
entropy. We’ll dwell on information theory in Chapter 7 and maximum entropy in Chap-
ter 10. Then in later chapters, other common and useful distributions will be used to build
generalized linear models (GLMs). When these other distributions are introduced, you’ll
learn the constraints that make them the uniquely most appropriate (consistent with our
assumptions) distributions.
For now, let’s take the ontological and epistemological justifications of just the Gaussian
distribution as reasons to start building models of measures around it. Throughout all of this
modeling, keep in mind that using a model is not equivalent to swearing an oath to it. The
golem is your servant, not the other way around. Later on, we will see good reasons not to
use Gaussian distributions.
Rethinking: Heavy tails.
The Gaussian distribution is very common in nature and has some nice
statistical properties as well. But there are some risks in using it as a default data model. The extreme
ends of a distribution are known as its tails. And the Gaussian distribution has some very thin tails—
there is very little probability in them. Instead most of the mass in the Gaussian lies within one
standard deviation of the mean. Many natural (and unnatural) processes have much heavier tails.
These processes have much higher probabilities of producing extreme events. A real and important
example is financial time series—the ups and downs of a stock market can look Gaussian in the short
term, but over medium and long periods, extreme shocks make the Gaussian model (and anyone who
uses it) look foolish.67 Historical time series may behave similarly, and any inference for example of
trends in warfare are prone to heavy-tailed surprises.68 We’ll consider alternatives to the Gaussian
later.
Overthinking: Gaussian distribution. You don’t have to memorize the Gaussian probability distri-
bution formula to make good use of it. You’re computer already knows it. But a little knowledge of
its form can help demystify it. The probability density (see below) of some value y, given a Gaussian
(normal) distribution with mean µ and standard deviation σ, is:
p(y|µ, σ) =
1
√
2πσ2 exp

−(y −µ)2
2σ2

This looks monstrous. But the important bit is just the (y −µ)2 bit. This is the part that gives the
normal distribution its fundamental shape, a quadratic shape. Once you exponentiate the quadratic
shape, you get the classic bell curve. The rest of it just scales and standardizes the distribution so that
it sums to one, as all probability distributions must. But an expression as simple as exp(−y2) yields
the Gaussian prototype. Try it in R: curve( exp( -x^2 ) , from=-3 , to=3 ).
The Gaussian is a continuous distribution, unlike the discrete distributions of earlier chapters.
This means that the value y in the Gaussian distribution can be any continuous value. The binomial,
in contrast, requires integers. Probability distributions with only discrete outcomes, like the bino-
mial, are called probability mass functions and denoted Pr. Continuous ones like the Gaussian are
called probability density functions, denoted with p or just plain old f, depending upon author and
tradition. For mathematical reasons, probability densities, but not masses, can be greater than 1. Try
dnorm(0,0,0.1), for example, which is the way to make R calculate p(0|0, 0.1). The answer, about
