12
1. THE GOLEM OF PRAGUE
Figure 1.3. Saturn, much like Galileo must have seen it. The true shape
is uncertain, but not because of any sampling variation. Probability theory
can still help.
golems aren’t justifying their inferences with imagined repeat sampling. More generally,
Bayesian golems treat “randomness” as a property of information, not of the world. Nothing
in the real world—excepting controversial interpretations of quantum physics—is actually
random. Presumably, if we had more information, we could exactly predict everything. We
just use randomness to describe our uncertainty in the face of incomplete knowledge. From
the perspective of our golem, the coin toss is “random,” but it’s really the golem that is ran-
dom, not the coin.
Note that the preceding description doesn’t invoke anyone’s “beliefs” or subjective opin-
ions. Bayesian data analysis is just a logical procedure for processing information. There is
a tradition of using this procedure as a normative description of rational belief, a tradition
called Bayesianism.25 But this book neither describes nor advocates it. In fact, I’ll argue
that no statistical approach, Bayesian or otherwise, is by itself sufficient.
Rethinking: Probability is not unitary. It will make some readers uncomfortable to suggest that
there is more than one way to define “probability.” Aren’t mathematical concepts uniquely correct?
They are not. Once you adopt some set of premises, or axioms, everything does follow logically in
mathematical systems. But the axioms are open to debate and interpretation. So not only is there
“Bayesian” and “frequentist” probability, but there are different versions of Bayesian probability even,
relying upon different arguments to justify the approach. In more advanced Bayesian texts, you’ll
come across names like Bruno de Finetti, Richard T. Cox, and Leonard “Jimmie” Savage. Each of
these figures is associated with a somewhat different conception of Bayesian probability. There are
others. This book mainly follows the “logical” Cox (or Laplace-Jeffreys-Cox-Jaynes) interpretation.
This interpretation is presented beginning in the next chapter, but unfolds fully only in Chapter 10.
How can different interpretations of probability theory thrive? By themselves, mathematical en-
tities don’t necessarily “mean” anything, in the sense of real world implication. What does it mean to
take the square root of a negative number? What does mean to take a limit as something approaches
infinity? These are essential and routine concepts, but their meanings depend upon context and an-
alyst, upon beliefs about how well abstraction represents reality. Mathematics doesn’t access the real
world directly. So answering such questions remains a contentious and entertaining project, in all
