58
3. SAMPLING THE IMAGINARY
So the HPDI has some advantages over the PI. But in most cases, these two types of
interval are very similar.57 They only look so different in this case because the posterior
distribution is highly skewed. If we instead used samples from the posterior distribution for
six waters in nine tosses, these intervals would be nearly identical. Try it for yourself, using
different probability masses, such as prob=0.8 and prob=0.95. When the posterior is bell
shaped, it hardly matters which type of interval you use. Remember, we’re not launching
rockets or calibrating atom smashers, so fetishizing precision to the 5th decimal place will
not improve your science.
The HPDI also has some disadvantages. HPDI is more computationally intensive than PI
and suffers from greater simulation variance, which is a fancy way of saying that it is sensitive
to how many samples you draw from the posterior. It is also harder to understand and many
scientific audiences will not appreciate its features, while they will immediately understand a
percentile interval, as ordinary non-Bayesian intervals are typically interpreted (incorrectly)
as percentile intervals (although see the Rethinking box below).
Overall, if the choice of interval type makes a big difference, then you shouldn’t be us-
ing intervals to summarize the posterior. Remember, the entire posterior distribution is the
Bayesian “estimate.” It summarizes the relative plausibilities of each possible value of the
parameter. Intervals of the distribution are just helpful for summarizing it. If choice of in-
terval leads to different inferences, then you’d be better off just plotting the entire posterior
distribution.
Rethinking: What do compatibility intervals mean? It is common to hear that a 95% “confidence”
interval means that there is a probability 0.95 that the true parameter value lies within the interval. In
strict non-Bayesian statistical inference, such a statement is never correct, because strict non-Bayesian
inference forbids using probability to measure uncertainty about parameters. Instead, one should say
that if we repeated the study and analysis a very large number of times, then 95% of the computed in-
tervals would contain the true parameter value. If the distinction is not entirely clear to you, then you
are in good company. Most scientists find the definition of a confidence interval to be bewildering,
and many of them slip unconsciously into a Bayesian interpretation.
But whether you use a Bayesian interpretation or not, a 95% interval does not contain the true
value 95% of the time. The history of science teaches us that confidence intervals exhibit chronic
overconfidence.58 The word true should set off alarms that something is wrong with a statement like
“contains the true value.” The 95% is a small world number (see the introduction to Chapter 2), only
true in the model’s logical world. So it will never apply exactly to the real or large world. It is what the
golem believes, but you are free to believe something else. Regardless, the width of the interval, and
the values it covers, can provide valuable advice.
3.2.3. Point estimates. The third and final common summary task for the posterior is to
produce point estimates of some kind. Given the entire posterior distribution, what value
should you report? This seems like an innocent question, but it is difficult to answer. The
Bayesian parameter estimate is precisely the entire posterior distribution, which is not a sin-
gle number, but instead a function that maps each unique parameter value onto a plausibility
value. So really the most important thing to note is that you don’t have to choose a point es-
timate. It’s hardly ever necessary and often harmful. It discards information.
But if you must produce a single point to summarize the posterior, you’ll have to ask and
answer more questions. Consider the following example. Suppose again the globe tossing
experiment in which we observe 3 waters out of 3 tosses, as in Figure 3.3. Let’s consider three
alternative point estimates. First, it is very common for scientists to report the parameter
