3. SAMPLING THE IMAGINARY
51
This chapter teaches you basic skills for working with samples from the posterior dis-
tribution. It will seem a little silly to work with samples at this point, because the posterior
distribution for the globe tossing model is very simple. It’s so simple that it’s no problem to
work directly with the grid approximation or even the exact mathematical form.51 But there
are two reasons to adopt the sampling approach early on, before it’s really necessary.
First, many scientists are quite shaky about integral calculus, even though they have
strong and valid intuitions about how to summarize data. Working with samples transforms
a problem in calculus into a problem in data summary, into a frequency format problem. An
integral in a typical Bayesian context is just the total probability in some interval. That can be
a challenging calculus problem. But once you have samples from the probability distribution,
it’s just a matter of counting values in the interval. Even seemingly simple calculations, like
confidence intervals, are made difficult once a model has many parameters. In those cases,
one must average over the uncertainty in all other parameters, when describing the uncer-
tainty in a focal parameter. This requires a complicated integral, but only a very simple data
summary. An empirical attack on the posterior allows the scientist to ask and answer more
questions about the model, without relying upon a captive mathematician. For this reason,
it is often easier and more intuitive to work with samples from the posterior, than to work
with probabilities and integrals directly.
Second, some of the most capable methods of computing the posterior produce nothing
but samples. Many of these methods are variants of Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques
(MCMC, Chapter 9). So if you learn early on how to conceptualize and process samples from
the posterior, when you inevitably must fit a model to data using MCMC, you will already
know how to make sense of the output. Beginning with Chapter 9 of this book, you will
use MCMC to open up the types and complexity of models you can practically fit to data.
MCMC is no longer a technique only for experts, but rather part of the standard toolkit of
quantitative science. So it’s worth planning ahead.
So in this chapter we’ll begin to use samples to summarize and simulate model output.
The skills you learn here will apply to every problem in the remainder of the book, even
though the details of the models and how the samples are produced will vary.
Rethinking: Why statistics can’t save bad science. The vampirism example at the start of this chapter
has the same logical structure as many different signal detection problems: (1) There is some binary
state that is hidden from us; (2) we observe an imperfect cue of the hidden state; (3) we (should) use
Bayes’ theorem to logically deduce the impact of the cue on our uncertainty.
Scientific inference is often framed in similar terms: (1) An hypothesis is either true or false; (2)
we use a statistical procedure and get an imperfect cue of the hypothesis’ falsity; (3) we (should) use
Bayes’ theorem to logically deduce the impact of the cue on the status of the hypothesis. It’s the third
step that is hardly ever done. But let’s do it, for a toy example, so you can see how little statistical
procedures—Bayesian or not—may do for us.
Suppose the probability of a positive finding, when an hypothesis is true, is Pr(sig|true) = 0.95.
That’s the power of the test. Suppose that the probability of a positive finding, when an hypothesis is
false, is Pr(sig|false) = 0.05. That’s the false-positive rate, like the 5% of conventional significance
testing. Finally, we have to state the base rate at which hypotheses are true. Suppose for example that
1 in every 100 hypotheses turns out to be true. Then Pr(true) = 0.01. No one knows this value,
but the history of science suggests it’s small. See Chapter 17 for more discussion. Now use Bayes’ to
