32
2. SMALL WORLDS AND LARGE WORLDS
that order is irrelevant to inference. When something is irrelevant to the machine, it won’t
affect the inference directly. But it may affect it indirectly, because the data will depend upon
order. So it is important to check the model’s inferences in light of aspects of the data it does
not know about. Such checks are an inherently creative enterprise, left to the analyst and the
scientific community. Golems are very bad at it.
In Chapter 3, you’ll see some examples of such checks. For now, note that the goal is
not to test the truth value of the model’s assumptions. We know the model’s assumptions
are never exactly right, in the sense of matching the true data generating process. Therefore
there’s no point in checking if the model is true. Failure to conclude that a model is false
must be a failure of our imagination, not a success of the model. Moreover, models do not
need to be exactly true in order to produce highly precise and useful inferences. All manner
of small world assumptions about error distributions and the like can be violated in the large
world, but a model may still produce a perfectly useful estimate. This is because models
are essentially information processing machines, and there are some surprising aspects of
information that cannot be easily captured by framing the problem in terms of the truth of
assumptions.45
Instead, the objective is to check the model’s adequacy for some purpose. This usually
means asking and answering additional questions, beyond those that originally constructed
the model. Both the questions and answers will depend upon the scientific context. So it’s
hard to provide general advice. There will be many examples, throughout the book, and
of course the scientific literature is replete with evaluations of the suitability of models for
different jobs—prediction, comprehension, measurement, and persuasion.
Rethinking: Deflationary statistics. It may be that Bayesian inference is the best general purpose
method of inference known. However, Bayesian inference is much less powerful than we’d like it
to be. There is no approach to inference that provides universal guarantees. No branch of applied
mathematics has unfettered access to reality, because math is not discovered, like the proton. Instead
it is invented, like the shovel.46
2.3. Components of the model
Now that you’ve seen how the Bayesian model behaves, it’s time to open up the machine
and learn how it works. Consider three different kinds of things we counted in the previous
sections.
(1) The number of ways each conjecture could produce an observation
(2) The accumulated number of ways each conjecture could produce the entire data
(3) The initial plausibility of each conjectured cause of the data
Each of these things has a direct analog in conventional probability theory. And so the usual
way we build a statistical model involves choosing distributions and devices for each that
represent the relative numbers of ways things can happen.
In this section, you’ll meet these components in some detail and see how each relates to
the counting you did earlier in the chapter. The job in front of us is really nothing more than
naming all of the variables and defining each. We’ll take these tasks in turn.
2.3.1. Variables. Variables are just symbols that can take on different values. In a scientific
context, variables include things we wish to infer, such as proportions and rates, as well as
things we might observe, the data. In the globe tossing model, there are three variables.
