68
3. SAMPLING THE IMAGINARY
Figure 3.7 shows the simulated predictions, viewed in these two new ways. On the
left, the length of the longest run of water or land is plotted, with the observed value of 3
highlighted by the bold line. Again, the true observation is the most common simulated ob-
servation, but with a lot of spread around it. On the right, the number of switches from water
to land and land to water is shown, with the observed value of 6 highlighted in bold. Now
the simulated predictions appear less consistent with the data, as the majority of simulated
observations have fewer switches than were observed in the actual sample. This is consis-
tent with lack of independence between tosses of the globe, in which each toss is negatively
correlated with the last.
Does this mean that the model is bad? That depends. The model will always be wrong
in some sense, be mis-specified. But whether or not the mis-specification should lead us to
try other models will depend upon our specific interests. In this case, if tosses do tend to
switch from W to L and L to W, then each toss will provide less information about the true
coverage of water on the globe. In the long run, even the wrong model we’ve used throughout
the chapter will converge on the correct proportion. But it will do so more slowly than the
posterior distribution may lead us to believe.
Rethinking: What does more extreme mean? A common way of measuring deviation of observation
from model is to count up the tail area that includes the observed data and any more extreme data.
Ordinary p-values are an example of such a tail-area probability. When comparing observations to
distributions of simulated predictions, as in Figure 3.6 and Figure 3.7, we might wonder how far
out in the tail the observed data must be before we conclude that the model is a poor one. Because
statistical contexts vary so much, it’s impossible to give a universally useful answer.
But more importantly, there are usually very many ways to view data and define “extreme.” Or-
dinary p-values view the data in just the way the model expects it, and so provide a very weak form of
model checking. For example, the far-right plot in Figure 3.6 evaluates model fit in the best way for
the model. Alternative ways of defining “extreme” may provide a more serious challenge to a model.
The different definitions of extreme in Figure 3.7 can more easily embarrass it.
Model fitting remains an objective procedure—everyone and every golem conducts Bayesian
updating in a way that doesn’t depend upon personal preferences. But model checking is inherently
subjective, and this actually allows it to be quite powerful, since subjective knowledge of an empirical
domain provides expertise. Expertise in turn allows for imaginative checks of model performance.
Since golems have terrible imaginations, we need the freedom to engage our own imaginations. In
this way, the objective and subjective work together.63
3.4. Summary
This chapter introduced the basic procedures for manipulating posterior distributions.
Our fundamental tool is samples of parameter values drawn from the posterior distribution.
Working with samples transforms a problem of integral calculus into a problem of data sum-
mary. These samples can be used to produce intervals, point estimates, posterior predictive
checks, as well as other kinds of simulations.
Posterior predictive checks combine uncertainty about parameters, as described by the
posterior distribution, with uncertainty about outcomes, as described by the assumed like-
lihood function. These checks are useful for verifying that your software worked correctly.
They are also useful for prospecting for ways in which your models are inadequate.
