1.2. STATISTICAL RETHINKING
9
believe that the Ivory-billed Woodpecker is extinct will always be suspicious of a claimed
falsification. Those who believe it is still alive will tend to count the vaguest evidence as
falsification.
Another example, this one from physics, focuses on the detection of faster-than-light
(FTL) neutrinos.12 In September 2011, a large and respected team of physicists announced
detection of neutrinos—small, neutral sub-atomic particles able to pass easily and harm-
lessly through most matter—that arrived from Switzerland to Italy in slightly faster-than-
lightspeed time. According to Einstein, neutrinos cannot travel faster than the speed of light.
So this seems to be a falsification of special relativity. If so, it would turn physics on its head.
The dominant reaction from the physics community was not “Einstein was wrong!” but
instead “How did the team mess up the measurement?” The team that made the measure-
ment had the same reaction, and asked others to check their calculations and attempt to
replicate the result.
What could go wrong in the measurement? You might think measuring speed is a sim-
ple matter of dividing distance by time. It is, at the scale and energy you live at. But with
a fundamental particle like a neutrino, if you measure when it starts its journey, you stop
the journey. The particle is consumed by the measurement. So more subtle approaches are
needed. The detected difference from light-speed, furthermore, is quite small, and so even
the latency of the time it takes a signal to travel from a detector to a control room can be
orders of magnitude larger. And since the “measurement” in this case is really an estimate
from a statistical model, all of the assumptions of the model are now suspect. By 2013, the
physics community was unanimous that the FTL neutrino result was measurement error.
They found the technical error, which involved a poorly attached cable.13 Furthermore, neu-
trinos clocked from supernova events are consistent with Einstein, and those distances are
much larger and so would reveal differences in speed much better.
In both the woodpecker and neutrino dramas, the key dilemma is whether the falsifi-
cation is real or spurious. Measurement is complicated in both cases, but in quite different
ways, rendering both true-detection and false-detection plausible. Popper himself was aware
of this limitation inherent in measurement, and it may be one reason that Popper himself
saw science as being broader than falsification. But the probabilistic nature of evidence rarely
appears when practicing scientists discuss the philosophy and practice of falsification.14 My
reading of the history of science is that these sorts of measurement problems are the norm,
not the exception.15
1.2.2.2. Continuous hypotheses. Another problem for the swan story is that most inter-
esting scientific hypotheses are not of the kind “all swans are white” but rather of the kind:
H0: 80% of swans are white.
Or maybe:
H0: Black swans are rare.
Now what are we to conclude, after observing a black swan? The null hypothesis doesn’t
say black swans do not exist, but rather that they have some frequency. The task here is
not to disprove or prove a hypothesis of this kind, but rather to estimate and explain the
distribution of swan coloration as accurately as we can. Even when there is no measurement
error of any kind, this problem will prevent us from applying the modus tollens swan story
to our science.16
You might object that the hypothesis above is just not a good scientific hypothesis, be-
cause it isn’t easy to disprove. But if that’s the case, then most of the important questions
