50
3. SAMPLING THE IMAGINARY
But I don’t like these examples, for two reasons. First, there’s nothing uniquely “Bayesian”
about them. Remember: Bayesian inference is distinguished by a broad view of probability,
not by the use of Bayes’ theorem. Since all of the probabilities I provided above reference
frequencies of events, rather than theoretical parameters, all major statistical philosophies
would agree to use Bayes’ theorem in this case. Second, and more important to our work
in this chapter, these examples make Bayesian inference seem much harder than it has to
be. Few people find it easy to remember which number goes where, probably because they
never grasp the logic of the procedure. It’s just a formula that descends from the sky. If you
are confused, it is only because you are trying to understand.
There is a way to present the same problem that does make it more intuitive, however.
Suppose that instead of reporting probabilities, as before, I tell you the following:
(1) In a population of 100,000 people, 100 of them are vampires.
(2) Of the 100 who are vampires, 95 of them will test positive for vampirism.
(3) Of the 99,900 mortals, 999 of them will test positive for vampirism.
Now tell me, if we test all 100,000 people, what proportion of those who test positive for
vampirism actually are vampires? Many people, although certainly not all people, find this
presentation a lot easier.49 Now we can just count up the number of people who test positive:
95 + 999 = 1094. Out of these 1094 positive tests, 95 of them are real vampires, so that
implies:
Pr(vampire|positive) =
95
1094 ≈0.087
It’s exactly the same answer as before, but without a seemingly arbitrary rule.
The second presentation of the problem, using counts rather than probabilities, is often
called the frequency format or natural frequencies. Why a frequency format helps people in-
tuit the correct approach remains contentious. Some people think that human psychology
naturally works better when it receives information in the form a person in a natural envi-
ronment would receive it. In the real world, we encounter counts only. No one has ever seen
a probability, the thinking goes. But everyone sees counts (“frequencies”) in their daily lives.
Regardless of the explanation for this phenomenon, we can exploit it. And in this chap-
ter we exploit it by taking the probability distributions from the previous chapter and sam-
pling from them to produce counts. The posterior distribution is a probability distribution.
And like all probability distributions, we can imagine drawing samples from it. The sampled
events in this case are parameter values. Most parameters have no exact empirical realiza-
tion. The Bayesian formalism treats parameter distributions as relative plausibility, not as
any physical random process. In any event, randomness is always a property of informa-
tion, never of the real world. But inside the computer, parameters are just as empirical as
the outcome of a coin flip or a die toss or an agricultural experiment. The posterior defines
the expected frequency that different parameter values will appear, once we start plucking
parameters out of it.
Rethinking: The natural frequency phenomenon is not unique. Changing the representation of
a problem often makes it easier to address or inspires new ideas that were not available in an old
representation.50 In physics, switching between Newtonian and Lagrangian mechanics can make
problems much easier. In evolutionary biology, switching between inclusive fitness and multilevel
selection sheds new light on old models. And in statistics, switching between Bayesian and non-
Bayesian representations often teaches us new things about both approaches.
