16
1. THE GOLEM OF PRAGUE
In practice, many researchers simply trust their black-box software and interpret multilevel
regression exactly like single-level regression. In time, this will change. There was a time
in applied statistics when even ordinary multiple regression was considered cutting edge,
something for only experts to fiddle with. Instead, scientists used many simple procedures,
like t-tests. Now, almost everyone uses multivariate tools. The same will eventually be true
of multilevel models. Scholarly culture and curriculum still have some catching up to do.
Rethinking: Multilevel election forecasting. One of the older applications of multilevel modeling is
to forecast the outcomes of democratic elections. In the early 1960s, John Tukey (1915–2000) began
working for the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) in the United States, developing real-time
election prediction models that could exploit diverse types of data: polls, past elections, partial results,
and complete results from related districts. The models used a multilevel framework similar to the
models presented in Chapters 13 and 14. Tukey developed and used such models for NBC through
1978.32 Contemporary election prediction and poll aggregation remains an active topic for multilevel
modeling.33
1.3.4. Graphical causal models. When the wind blows, branches sway. If you are human,
you immediately interpret this statement as causal: The wind makes the branches move. But
all we see is a statistical association. From the data alone, it could also be that the branches
swaying makes the wind. That conclusion seems foolish, because you know trees do not
sway their own branches. A statistical model is an amazing association engine. It makes
it possible to detect associations between causes and their effects. But a statistical model
is never sufficient for inferring cause, because the statistical model makes no distinction
between the wind causing the branches to sway and the branches causing the wind to blow.
Facts outside the data are needed to decide which explanation is correct.
Cross-validation and information criteria try to guess predictive accuracy. When I in-
troduced them above, I described overfitting as the primary paradox in prediction. Now we
turn to a secondary paradox in prediction: Models that are causally incorrect can make better
predictions than those that are causally correct. As a result, focusing on prediction can system-
atically mislead us. And while you may have heard that randomized controlled experiments
allow causal inference, these risks entail in randomized experiments as well. No one is safe.
I will call this the identification problem and carefully distinguish it from the prob-
lem of raw prediction. Consider two different meanings of “prediction.” The simplest applies
when we are external observers simply trying to guess what will happen next. In that case,
tools like cross validation are very useful. But these tools will happily recommend models
that contain confounding variables and suggest incorrect causal relationships. Why? Con-
founded relationships are real associations, and they can improve prediction. After all, if
you look outside and see branches swaying, it really does predict wind. Successful predic-
tion does not require correct causal identification. In fact, as you’ll see later in the book,
predictions may actually improve when we use a model that is casually misleading.
But what happens when we intervene in the world? Now everything changes. Now we
must consider a second meaning of “prediction”: What will happen when we intervene in the
world. Suppose we recruit many people to climb into the trees and sway the branches. Will it
make wind? Not much. Often the point of statistical modeling is to produce understanding
that leads to generalization and application. In that case, we need more than just good predic-
tions, in the absence of intervention. We also need an accurate causal understanding. But
