1.3. TOOLS FOR GOLEM ENGINEERING
15
We will be interested in multilevel models primarily because they help us deal with over-
fitting. Cross-validation and information criteria measure overfitting risk and help us to
recognize it. But multilevel models actually do something about it. What they do is exploit
an amazing statistical trick known as partial pooling that pools information across units
in the data in order to produce better estimates for all units. The details will wait until Chap-
ter 13.
Partial pooling is the key technology, and the contexts in which it is appropriate are
diverse. Here are four commonplace examples.
(1) To adjust estimates for repeat sampling. When more than one observation arises
from the same individual, location, or time, then traditional, single-level models
may mislead us.
(2) To adjust estimates for imbalance in sampling. When some individuals, locations, or
times are sampled more than others, we may also be misled by single-level models.
(3) To study variation. If our research questions include variation among individuals
or other groups within the data, then multilevel models are a big help, because they
model variation explicitly.
(4) To avoid averaging. Frequently, scholars pre-average some data to construct vari-
ables for a regression analysis. This can be dangerous, because averaging removes
variation. It therefore manufactures false confidence. Multilevel models allow us
to preserve the uncertainty in the original, pre-averaged values, while still using
the average to make predictions.
All four apply to contexts in which the researcher recognizes clusters or groups of measure-
ments that may differ from one another. These clusters or groups may be individuals such
as different students, locations such as different cities, or times such as different years. Since
each cluster may well have a different average tendency or respond differently to any treat-
ment, clustered data often benefit from being modeled by a golem that expects such variation.
But the scope of multilevel modeling is much greater than these examples. Diverse
model types turn out to be multilevel: models for missing data (imputation), measurement
error, factor analysis, some time series models, types of spatial and network regression, and
phylogenetic regressions all are special applications of the multilevel strategy. Grasping the
concept of multilevel modeling may lead to a perspective shift. Suddenly single-level models
end up looking like mere components of multilevel models. The multilevel strategy provides
an engineering principle to help us to introduce these components into a particular analysis,
exactly where we think we need them.
I want to convince the reader of something that appears unreasonable: multilevel regres-
sion deserves to be the default form of regression. Papers that do not use multilevel models
should have to justify not using a multilevel approach. Certainly some data and contexts do
not need the multilevel treatment. But most contemporary studies in the social and natural
sciences, whether experimental or not, would benefit from it. Perhaps the most important
reason is that even well-controlled treatments interact with unmeasured aspects of the indi-
viduals, groups, or populations studied. This leads to variation in treatment effects, in which
individuals or groups vary in how they respond to the same circumstance. Multilevel mod-
els attempt to quantify the extent of this variation, as well as identify which units in the data
responded in which ways.
These benefits don’t come for free, however. Fitting and interpreting multilevel mod-
els can be considerably harder than fitting and interpreting a traditional regression model.
