2.2. BUILDING A MODEL
31
the other direction. The maximum height of the curve increases with each sample, meaning
that fewer values of p amass more plausibility as the amount of evidence increases. As each
new observation is added, the curve is updated consistent with all previous observations.
Notice that every updated set of plausibilities becomes the initial plausibilities for the
next observation. Every conclusion is the starting point for future inference. However, this
updating process works backwards, as well as forwards. Given the final set of plausibilities
in the bottom-right plot of Figure 2.5, and knowing the final observation (W), it is possible
to mathematically divide out the observation, to infer the previous plausibility curve. So the
data could be presented to your model in any order, or all at once even. In most cases, you
will present the data all at once, for the sake of convenience. But it’s important to realize that
this merely represents abbreviation of an iterated learning process.
Rethinking: Sample size and reliable inference. It is common to hear that there is a minimum num-
ber of observations for a useful statistical estimate. For example, there is a widespread superstition
that 30 observations are needed before one can use a Gaussian distribution. Why? In non-Bayesian
statistical inference, procedures are often justified by the method’s behavior at very large sample sizes,
so-called asymptotic behavior. As a result, performance at small samples sizes is questionable.
In contrast, Bayesian estimates are valid for any sample size. This does not mean that more data
isn’t helpful—it certainly is. Rather, the estimates have a clear and valid interpretation, no matter the
sample size. But the price for this power is dependency upon the initial plausibilities, the prior. If
the prior is a bad one, then the resulting inference will be misleading. There’s no free lunch,44 when
it comes to learning about the world. A Bayesian golem must choose an initial plausibility, and a
non-Bayesian golem must choose an estimator. Both golems pay for lunch with their assumptions.
2.2.3. Evaluate. The Bayesian model learns in a way that is demonstrably optimal, provided
that the real, large world is accurately described by the model. This is to say that your
Bayesian machine guarantees perfect inference, within the small world. No other way of
using the available information, and beginning with the same state of information, could do
better.
Don’t get too excited about this logical virtue, however. The calculations may malfunc-
tion, so results always have to be checked. And if there are important differences between
the model and reality, then there is no logical guarantee of large world performance. And
even if the two worlds did match, any particular sample of data could still be misleading. So
it’s worth keeping in mind at least two cautious principles.
First, the model’s certainty is no guarantee that the model is a good one. As the amount
of data increases, the globe tossing model will grow increasingly sure of the proportion of
water. This means that the curves in Figure 2.5 will become increasingly narrow and tall,
restricting plausible values within a very narrow range. But models of all sorts—Bayesian or
not—can be very confident about an inference, even when the model is seriously misleading.
This is because the inferences are conditional on the model. What your model is telling you
is that, given a commitment to this particular model, it can be very sure that the plausible
values are in a narrow range. Under a different model, things might look differently. There
will be examples in later chapters.
Second, it is important to supervise and critique your model’s work. Consider again the
fact that the updating in the previous section works in any order of data arrival. We could
shuffle the order of the observations, as long as six W’s and three L’s remain, and still end up
with the same final plausibility curve. That is only true, however, because the model assumes
