74
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
Earth
equant
planet
epicycle
deferent
Figure 4.1. The Ptolemaic Universe, in
which complex motion of the planets in
the night sky was explained by orbits
within orbits, called epicycles. The model
is incredibly wrong, yet makes quite good
predictions.
sense that once you learn to build and interpret linear regression models, you can more easily
move on to other types of regression which are less normal.
4.1. Why normal distributions are normal
Suppose you and a thousand of your closest friends line up on the halfway line of a soccer
field (football pitch). Each of you has a coin in your hand. At the sound of the whistle, you
begin flipping the coins. Each time a coin comes up heads, that person moves one step
towards the left-hand goal. Each time a coin comes up tails, that person moves one step
towards the right-hand goal. Each person flips the coin 16 times, follows the implied moves,
and then stands still. Now we measure the distance of each person from the halfway line.
Can you predict what proportion of the thousand people who are standing on the halfway
line? How about the proportion 5 yards left of the line?
It’s hard to say where any individual person will end up, but you can say with great con-
fidence what the collection of positions will be. The distances will be distributed in approxi-
mately normal, or Gaussian, fashion. This is true even though the underlying distribution is
binomial. It does this because there are so many more possible ways to realize a sequence of
left-right steps that sums to zero. There are slightly fewer ways to realize a sequence that ends
up one step left or right of zero, and so on, with the number of possible sequences declining
in the characteristic bell curve of the normal distribution.
4.1.1. Normal by addition. Let’s see this result, by simulating this experiment in R. To show
that there’s nothing special about the underlying coin flip, assume instead that each step is
different from all the others, a random distance between zero and one yard. Thus a coin is
flipped, a distance between zero and one yard is taken in the indicated direction, and the
process repeats. To simulate this, we generate for each person a list of 16 random numbers
between −1 and 1. These are the individual steps. Then we add these steps together to get
the position after 16 steps. Then we need to replicate this procedure 1000 times. This is the
sort of task that would be harrowing in a point-and-click interface, but it is made trivial by
the command line. Here’s a single line to do the whole thing:
