62
3. SAMPLING THE IMAGINARY
(4) Research design. If you can simulate observations from your hypothesis, then you
can evaluate whether the research design can be effective. In a narrow sense, this
means doing power analysis, but the possibilities are much broader.
(5) Forecasting. Estimates can be used to simulate new predictions, for new cases and
future observations. These forecasts can be useful as applied prediction, but also
for model criticism and revision.
In this final section of the chapter, we’ll look at how to produce simulated observations and
how to perform some simple model checks.
3.3.1. Dummy data. Let’s summarize the globe tossing model that you’ve been working
with for two chapters now. A fixed true proportion of water p exists, and that is the target of
our inference. Tossing the globe in the air and catching it produces observations of “water”
and “land” that appear in proportion to p and 1 −p, respectively.
Now note that these assumptions not only allow us to infer the plausibility of each possi-
ble value of p, after observation. That’s what you did in the previous chapter. These assump-
tions also allow us to simulate the observations that the model implies. They allow this,
because likelihood functions work in both directions. Given a realized observation, the like-
lihood function says how plausible the observation is. And given only the parameters, the
likelihood defines a distribution of possible observations that we can sample from, to simu-
late observation. In this way, Bayesian models are always generative, capable of simulating
predictions. Many non-Bayesian models are also generative, but many are not.
We will call such simulated data dummy data, to indicate that it is a stand-in for actual
data. With the globe tossing model, the dummy data arises from a binomial likelihood:
Pr(W|N, p) =
N!
W!(N −W)!pW(1 −p)N−W
where W is an observed count of “water” and N is the number of tosses. Suppose N = 2, two
tosses of the globe. Then there are only three possible observations: 0 water, 1 water, 2 water.
You can quickly compute the probability of each, for any given value of p. Let’s use p = 0.7,
which is just about the true proportion of water on the Earth:
R code
3.20
dbinom( 0:2 , size=2 , prob=0.7 )
[1] 0.09 0.42 0.49
This means that there’s a 9% chance of observing w = 0, a 42% chance of w = 1, and a 49%
chance of w = 2. If you change the value of p, you’ll get a different distribution of implied
observations.
Now we’re going to simulate observations, using these probabilities. This is done by
sampling from the distribution just described above. You could use sample to do this, but
R provides convenient sampling functions for all the ordinary probability distributions, like
the binomial. So a single dummy data observation of W can be sampled with:
R code
3.21
rbinom( 1 , size=2 , prob=0.7 )
[1] 1
That 1 means “1 water in 2 tosses.” The “r” in rbinom stands for “random.” It can also
generate more than one simulation at a time. A set of 10 simulations can be made by:
