2.2. BUILDING A MODEL
29
You can motivate your data story by trying to explain how each piece of data is born. This
usually means describing aspects of the underlying reality as well as the sampling process.
The data story in this case is simply a restatement of the sampling process:
(1) The true proportion of water covering the globe is p.
(2) A single toss of the globe has a probability p of producing a water (W) observation.
It has a probability 1 −p of producing a land (L) observation.
(3) Each toss of the globe is independent of the others.
The data story is then translated into a formal probability model. This probability model is
easy to build, because the construction process can be usefully broken down into a series of
component decisions. Before meeting these components, however, it’ll be useful to visualize
how a Bayesian model behaves. After you’ve become acquainted with how such a model
learns from data, we’ll pop the machine open and investigate its engineering.
Rethinking: The value of storytelling. The data story has value, even if you quickly abandon it and
never use it to build a model or simulate new observations. Indeed, it is important to eventually
discard the story, because many different stories always correspond to the same model. As a result,
showing that a model does a good job does not in turn uniquely support our data story. Still, the story
has value because in trying to outline the story, often one realizes that additional questions must be
answered. Most data stories are much more specific than are the verbal hypotheses that inspire data
collection. Hypotheses can be vague, such as “it’s more likely to rain on warm days.” When you
are forced to consider sampling and measurement and make a precise statement of how temperature
predicts rain, many stories and resulting models will be consistent with the same vague hypothesis.
Resolving that ambiguity often leads to important realizations and model revisions, before any model
is fit to data.
2.2.2. Bayesian updating. Our problem is one of using the evidence—the sequence of globe
tosses—to decide among different possible proportions of water on the globe. These propor-
tions are like the conjectured marbles inside the bag, from earlier in the chapter. Each possi-
ble proportion may be more or less plausible, given the evidence. A Bayesian model begins
with one set of plausibilities assigned to each of these possibilities. These are the prior plau-
sibilities. Then it updates them in light of the data, to produce the posterior plausibilities.
This updating process is a kind of learning, called Bayesian updating. The details of this
updating—how it is mechanically achieved—can wait until later in the chapter. For now,
let’s look only at how such a machine behaves.
For the sake of the example only, let’s program our Bayesian machine to initially assign
the same plausibility to every proportion of water, every value of p. We’ll do better than this
later. Now look at the top-left plot in Figure 2.5. The dashed horizontal line represents this
initial plausibility of each possible value of p. After seeing the first toss, which is a “W,” the
model updates the plausibilities to the solid line. The plausibility of p = 0 has now fallen
to exactly zero—the equivalent of “impossible.” Why? Because we observed at least one
speck of water on the globe, so now we know there is some water. The model executes this
logic automatically. You don’t have it instruct it to account for this consequence. Probability
theory takes care of it for you, because it is essentially counting paths through the garden of
forking data, as in the previous section.
Likewise, the plausibility of p > 0.5 has increased. This is because there is not yet any
evidence that there is land on the globe, so the initial plausibilities are modified to be consis-
tent with this. Note however that the relative plausibilities are what matter, and there isn’t
