134
5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES
Any DAG may imply that some variables are independent of others under certain condi-
tions. These are the model’s testable implications, it’s conditional independencies. Con-
ditional independencies come in two forms. First, they are statements of which variables
should be associated with one another (or not) in the data. Second, they are statements of
which variables become dis-associated when we condition on some other set of variables.
In more formal notation, the implication that some variable Y is not associated with some
variable X, after conditioning on some other variable Z is written: Y ⊥⊥X|Z. This is very
weird notation and any feelings of annoyance on your part are justified. So let’s consider this
in the context of the divorce example.
What are the conditional independencies of the DAGs at the top of the page? How do we
derive these conditional independencies? Finding conditional independencies is not hard,
but also not at all obvious. With a little practice, it becomes very easy. The more general
rules can wait until the next chapter. For now, let’s consider each DAG in turn and inspect
the possibilities.
For the DAG on the left above, the one with three arrows, first note that every pair of
variables is correlated. This is because there is a causal arrow between every pair. These
arrows create correlations. So before we condition on anything, everything is associated
with everything else. This is already a testable implication. We could write it:
D̸⊥⊥A, D̸⊥⊥M, A̸⊥⊥M
That̸ ⊥⊥thing means “not independent of.” If we now look in the data and find that any
pair of variables are not associated, then something is wrong with the DAG (assuming the
data are correct). In these data, all three pairs are in fact strongly associated. Check for
yourself. You can use cor() to measure simple correlations. Correlations are very simple
and sometimes terrible measures of association—mamy different patterns of association with
different implications can produce the same correlation. But they do honest work in this case.
Are there any other testable implications for the first DAG above? No. It will be easier to
see why, if we slide over to consider the second DAG, the one in which M has no influence
on D. In this DAG, it is still true that all three variable are associated with one another. A is
associated with D and M because it influences them both. And D and M are associated with
one another, because M influences them both. They share a cause, and this leads them to be
correlated with one another through that cause. But suppose we condition on A. All of the
information in M that is relevant to predicting D is in A. So once we’ve conditioned on A,
M tells us nothing more about D. So in the second DAG, a testable implication is that D is
independent of M, conditional on A. In other words, D ⊥⊥M|A. The same thing does not
happen with the first DAG. Conditioning on A does not make D independent of M, because
M really influences D all by itself in this model.
If you are having trouble seeing these implications, the conditional independencies, the
dagitty package can find them for you. Here’s the code to define the second DAG and
display the implied conditional independencies.
R code
5.8
DMA_dag2 <- dagitty('dag{ D <- A -> M }')
impliedConditionalIndependencies( DMA_dag2 )
D _||_ M | A
The first DAG has no conditional independencies. You can define it and check with this:
