4.4. LINEAR PREDICTION
95
later on to add some of that thrill, when we reconsider this example from a more causal per-
spective. Right now, I ask only that you focus on the mechanics of estimating an association
between two variables.
Go ahead and plot height and weight against one another to get an idea of how strongly
they covary:
R code
4.37
plot( d2$height ~ d2$weight )
The resulting plot is not shown here. You really should do it yourself. Once you can see
the plot, you’ll see that there’s obviously a relationship: Knowing a person’s weight helps you
predict height.
To make this vague observation into a more precise quantitative model that relates values
of weight to plausible values of height, we need some more technology. How do we take
our Gaussian model from the previous section and incorporate predictor variables?
Rethinking: What is “regression”? Many diverse types of models are called “regression.” The term
has come to mean using one or more predictor variables to model the distribution of one or more
outcome variables. The original use of term, however, arose from anthropologist Francis Galton’s
(1822–1911) observation that the sons of tall and short men tended to be more similar to the popula-
tion mean, hence regression to the mean.73
The causal reasons for regression to the mean are diverse. In the case of height, the causal expla-
nation is a key piece of the foundation of population genetics. But this phenomenon arises statistically
whenever individual measurements are assigned a common distribution, leading to shrinkage as each
measurement informs the others. In the context of Galton’s height data, attempting to predict each
son’s height on the basis of only his father’s height is folly. Better to use the population of fathers.
This leads to a prediction for each son which is similar to each father but “shrunk” towards the over-
all mean. Such predictions are routinely better. This same regression/shrinkage phenomenon applies
at higher levels of abstraction and forms one basis of multilevel modeling (Chapter 13).
4.4.1. The linear model strategy. The strategy is to make the parameter for the mean of
a Gaussian distribution, µ, into a linear function of the predictor variable and other, new
parameters that we invent. This strategy is often simply called the linear model. The linear
model strategy instructs the golem to assume that the predictor variable has a constant and
additive relationship to the mean of the outcome. The golem then computes the posterior
distribution of this constant relationship.
What this means, recall, is that the machine considers every possible combination of the
parameter values. With a linear model, some of the parameters now stand for the strength
of association between the mean of the outcome, µ, and the value of some other variable.
For each combination of values, the machine computes the posterior probability, which is
a measure of relative plausibility, given the model and data. So the posterior distribution
ranks the infinite possible combinations of parameter values by their logical plausibility. As
a result, the posterior distribution provides relative plausibilities of the different possible
strengths of association, given the assumptions you programmed into the model. We ask
the golem: “Consider all the lines that relate one variable to the other. Rank all of these lines
by plausibility, given these data.” The golem answers with a posterior distribution.
