6.3. COLLIDER BIAS
181
If so, is that association causal? Here, I want to show you how controlling for a plausible
confound of happiness can actually bias inference about the influence of age.89
Suppose, just to be provocative, that an individual’s average happiness is a trait that is
determined at birth and does not change with age. However, happiness does influence events
in one’s life. One of those events is marriage. Happier people are more likely to get married.
Another variable that causally influences marriage is age: The more years you are alive, the
more likely you are to eventually get married. Putting these three variables together, this is
the causal model:
A
H
M
Happiness (H) and age (A) both cause marriage (M). Marriage is therefore a collider. Even
though there isno causal association between happiness and age, if we conditiononmarriage—
which means here, if we include it as a predictor in a regression—then it will induce a statis-
tical association between age and happiness. And this can mislead us to think that happiness
changes with age, when in fact it is constant.
To convince you of this, let’s do another simulation. Simulations are useful in these ex-
amples, because these are the only times when we know the true causal model. If a procedure
cannot figure out the truth in a simulated example, we shouldn’t trust it in a real one. We’re
going to do a fancier simulation this time, using an agent-based model of aging and marriage
to produce a simulated data set to use in a regression. Here is the simulation design:
(1) Each year, 20 people are born with uniformly distributed happiness values.
(2) Each year, each person ages one year. Happiness does not change.
(3) At age 18, individuals can become married. The odds of marriage each year are
proportional to an individual’s happiness.
(4) Once married, an individual remains married.
(5) After age 65, individuals leave the sample. (They move to Spain.)
I’ve written this algorithm into the rethinking package. You can run it out for 1000 years
and collect the resulting data:
R code
6.21
library(rethinking)
d <- sim_happiness( seed=1977 , N_years=1000 )
precis(d)
'data.frame': 1300 obs. of 3 variables:
mean
sd
5.5% 94.5%
histogram
age
33.0 18.77
4.00 62.00 ▇▇▇▇▇▇▇▇▇▇▇▇▇
married
0.3
0.46
0.00
1.00
▇▁▁▁▁▁▁▁▁▃
happiness
0.0
1.21 -1.79
1.79
▇▅▇▅▅▇▅▇
These data comprise 1300 people of all ages from birth to 65 years old. The variables corre-
spond to the variables in the DAG above, and the simulation itself obeys the DAG.
I’ve plotted these data in Figure 6.4, showing each individual as a point. Filled points
are married individuals. Age is on the horizontal, and happiness the vertical, with the hap-
piest individuals at the top. At age 18, they become able to marry, and then gradually more
individuals are married each year. So at older ages, more individuals are married. But at all
ages, the happiest individuals are more likely to be married.
