4.4. LINEAR PREDICTION
103
Let’s focus on b (β), because it’s the new parameter. Since β is a slope, the value 0.90
can be read as a person 1 kg heavier is expected to be 0.90 cm taller. 89% of the posterior
probability lies between 0.84 and 0.97. That suggests that β values close to zero or greatly
above one are highly incompatible with these data and this model. It is most certainly not
evidence that the relationship between weight and height is linear, because the model only
considered lines. It just says that, if you are committed to a line, then lines with a slope
around 0.9 are plausible ones.
Remember, the numbers in the default precis output aren’t sufficient to describe the
quadratic posterior completely. For that, we also require the variance-covariance matrix.
You can see the covariances among the parameters with vcov:
R code
4.45
round( vcov( m4.3 ) , 3 )
a
b sigma
a
0.073 0.000 0.000
b
0.000 0.002 0.000
sigma 0.000 0.000 0.037
Very little covariation among the parameters in this case. Using pairs(m4.3) shows both
the marginal posteriors and the covariance. In the problems at the end of the chapter, you’ll
see that the lack of covariance among the parameters results from the something called cen-
tering.
4.4.3.2. Plotting posterior inference against the data. It’s almost always much more use-
ful to plot the posterior inference against the data. Not only does plotting help in interpret-
ing the posterior, but it also provides an informal check on model assumptions. When the
model’s predictions don’t come close to key observations or patterns in the plotted data,
then you might suspect the model either did not fit correctly or is rather badly specified. But
even if you only treat plots as a way to help in interpreting the posterior, they are invaluable.
For simple models like this one, it is possible (but not always easy) to just read the table of
numbers and understand what the model says. But for even slightly more complex models,
especially those that include interaction effects (Chapter 8), interpreting posterior distribu-
tions is hard. Combine with this the problem of incorporating the information in vcov into
your interpretations, and the plots are irreplaceable.
We’re going to start with a simple version of that task, superimposing just the posterior
mean values over the height and weight data. Then we’ll slowly add more and more infor-
mation to the prediction plots, until we’ve used the entire posterior distribution.
We’ll start with just the raw data and a single line. The code below plots the raw data,
computes the posterior mean values for a and b, then draws the implied line:
R code
4.46
plot( height ~ weight , data=d2 , col=rangi2 )
post <- extract.samples( m4.3 )
a_map <- mean(post$a)
b_map <- mean(post$b)
curve( a_map + b_map*(x - xbar) , add=TRUE )
You can see the resulting plot in Figure 4.6. Each point in this plot is a single individual.
The black line is defined by the mean slope β and mean intercept α. This is not a bad line. It
