5 The Many Variables & The Spurious Waffles
One of the most reliable sources of waffles in North America, if not the entire world, is
a Waffle House diner. Waffle House is nearly always open, even just after a hurricane. Most
diners invest in disaster preparedness, including having their own electrical generators. As a
consequence, the United States’ disaster relief agency (FEMA) informally uses Waffle House
as an index of disaster severity.77 If the Waffle House is closed, that’s a serious event.
It is ironic then that steadfast Waffle House is associated with the nation’s highest divorce
rates (Figure 5.1). States with many Waffle Houses per person, like Georgia and Alabama,
also have some of the highest divorce rates in the United States. The lowest divorce rates are
found where there are zero Waffle Houses. Could always-available waffles and hash brown
potatoes put marriage at risk?
Probably not. This is an example of a misleading correlation. No one thinks there is any
plausible mechanism by which Waffle House diners make divorce more likely. Instead, when
we see a correlation of this kind, we immediately start asking about other variables that are
really driving the relationship between waffles and divorce. In this case, Waffle House began
in Georgia in the year 1955. Over time, the diners spread across the Southern United States,
remaining largely within it. So Waffle House is associated with the South. Divorce is not a
uniquely Southern institution, but the Southern United States has some of the highest divorce
rates in the nation. So it’s probably just an accident of history that Waffle House and high
divorce rates both occur in the South.
Such accidents are commonplace. It is not surprising that Waffle House is correlated
with divorce, because correlation in general is not surprising. In large data sets, every pair
of variables has a statistically discernible non-zero correlation.78 But since most correlations
do not indicate causal relationships, we need tools for distinguishing mere association from
evidence of causation. This is why so much effort is devoted to multiple regression, using
more than one predictor variable to simultaneously model an outcome. Reasons given for
multiple regression models include:
(1) Statistical “control” for confounds. A confound is something that misleads us about
a causal influence—there will be a more precise definition in the next chapter. The
spurious waffles and divorce correlation is one possible type of confound, where the
confound (southernness) makes a variable with no real importance (Waffle House
density) appear to be important. But confounds are diverse. They can hide real
important variables just as easily as they can produce false ones.
(2) Multiple causation. A phenomenon may arise from multiple causes. Measurement
of each cause is useful, so when we can use the same data to estimate more than one
127
