162
5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES
R code
5.53
m5.10 <- quap(
alist(
K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ),
mu <- a[clade_id] + h[house],
a[clade_id] ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ),
h[house] ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ),
sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
) , data=d )
If you inspect the posterior, you’ll see that Slytherin stands out.
Rethinking: Differences and statistical significance. A common error in interpretation of parameter
estimates is to suppose that because one parameter is sufficiently far from zero—is “significant”—and
another parameter is not—is “not significant”—that the difference between the parameters is also
significant. This is not necessarily so.83 This isn’t just an issue for non-Bayesian analysis: If you want
to know the distribution of a difference, then you must compute that difference, a contrast. It isn’t
enough to just observe, for example, that a slope among males overlaps a lot with zero while the
same slope among females is reliably above zero. You must compute the posterior distribution of the
difference in slope between males and females. For example, suppose you have posterior distributions
for two parameters, βf and βm. βf’s mean and standard deviation is 0.15±0.02, and βm’s is 0.02±0.10.
So while βf is reliably different from zero (“significant”) and βm is not, the difference between the two
(assuming they are uncorrelated) is (0.15 −0.02) ±
√
0.022 + 0.12 ≈0.13 ± 0.10. The distribution
of the difference overlaps a lot with zero. In other words, you can be confident that βf is far from zero,
but you cannot be sure that the difference between βf and βm is far from zero.
In the context of non-Bayesian significance testing, this phenomenon arises from the fact that
statistical significance is inferentially powerful in one way: difference from the null. When βm over-
laps with zero, it may also overlap with values very far from zero. Its value is uncertain. So when you
then compare βm to βf, that comparison is also uncertain, manifesting in the width of the posterior
distribution of the difference βf −βm. Lurking underneath this example is a more fundamental mis-
take in interpreting statistical significance: The mistake of accepting the null hypothesis. Whenever
an article or book says something like “we found no difference” or “no effect,” this usually means
that some parameter was not significantly different from zero, and so the authors adopted zero as the
estimate. This is both illogical and extremely common.
5.4. Summary
This chapter introduced multiple regression, a way of constructing descriptive models
for how the mean of a measurement is associated with more than one predictor variable. The
defining question of multiple regression is: What is the value of knowing each predictor, once
we already know the other predictors? Implicit in this question are: (1) a focus on the value
of the predictors for description of the sample, instead of forecasting a future sample; and
(2) the assumption that the value of each predictor does not depend upon the values of the
other predictors. In later chapters, we confront these two issues. But before that, in the next
chapter we’ll see how adding predictor variables can create as many problems as it can solve.
5.5. Practice
Easy.
