4.3. GAUSSIAN MODEL OF HEIGHT
85
Whatever the prior, it’s a very good idea to plot your priors, so you have a sense of the
assumption they build into the model. In this case:
R code
4.12
curve( dnorm( x , 178 , 20 ) , from=100 , to=250 )
Execute that code yourself, to see that the golem is assuming that the average height (not
each individual height) is almost certainly between 140 cm and 220 cm. So this prior carries
a little information, but not a lot. The σ prior is a truly flat prior, a uniform one, that functions
just to constrain σ to have positive probability between zero and 50cm. View it with:
R code
4.13
curve( dunif( x , 0 , 50 ) , from=-10 , to=60 )
A standard deviation like σ must be positive, so bounding it at zero makes sense. How should
we pick the upper bound? In this case, a standard deviation of 50cm would imply that 95%
of individual heights lie within 100cm of the average height. That’s a very large range.
All this talk is nice, but it’ll help to really see what these priors imply about the distribu-
tion of individual heights. This is an essential part of your modeling, the prior predictive
simulation. Once you’ve chosen priors for h, µ, and σ, these imply a joint prior distribution
of individual heights. By simulating from this distribution, you can see what your choices
imply about observable height. This helps you diagnose bad choices. Lots of conventional
choices are indeed bad ones, and we’ll be able to see this by conducting prior predictive sim-
ulations.
Okay, so how to do this? You can quickly simulate heights by sampling from the prior,
like you sampled from the posterior back in Chapter 3. Remember, every posterior is also
potentially a prior for a subsequent analysis, so you can process priors just like posteriors.
R code
4.14
sample_mu <- rnorm( 1e4 , 178 , 20 )
sample_sigma <- runif( 1e4 , 0 , 50 )
prior_h <- rnorm( 1e4 , sample_mu , sample_sigma )
dens( prior_h )
This density, as well as the individual densities for µ and σ, as shown in Figure 4.3. It dis-
plays a vaguely bell-shaped density with thick tails. It is the expected distribution of heights,
averaged over the prior. Notice that the prior probability distribution of height is not itself
Gaussian. This is okay. The distribution you see is not an empirical expectation, but rather
the distribution of relative plausibilities of different heights, before seeing the data.
Prior predictive simulation is very useful for assigning sensible priors, because it can
be quite hard to anticipate how priors influence the observable variables. As an example,
consider a much flatter and less informative prior for µ, like µ ∼Normal(178, 100). Priors
with such large standard deviations are quite common in Bayesian models, but the are hardly
ever sensible. Let’s use simulation again to see the implied heights:
R code
4.15
sample_mu <- rnorm( 1e4 , 178 , 100 )
prior_h <- rnorm( 1e4 , sample_mu , sample_sigma )
dens( prior_h )
The result is displayed in the lower right of Figure 4.3. Now the model, before seeing the
data, expects 4% of people, those left of the dashed line, to have negative height. It also
