4.7. PRACTICE
123
This is shown in the bottom of the figure. The spline is much wigglier now. Try increasing
the number of knots and the basis degree to see how this changes the spline.
You might wonder how many knots is correct. We’ll be ready to address that question
in a few more chapters. Really we’ll answer it by changing the question.
Overthinking: Matrix multiplication in the spline model. To make model m4.7 easier to program,
we used a matrix multiplication of the basis matrix B by the vector of parameters w: B %*% w. This
notation is just linear algebra shorthand for (1) multiplying each element of the vector w by each value
in the corresponding column of B and then (2) summing up each row of the result. You could also fit
the same model with the following less-elegant code:
R code
4.79
m4.7alt <- quap(
alist(
T ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
mu <- a + sapply( 1:1124 , function(i) sum( B[i,]*w ) ) ,
a ~ dnorm(6,10),
w ~ dnorm(0,1),
sigma ~ dexp(1)
),
data=list( T=d2$temp , B=B ) ,
start=list( w=rep( 0 , ncol(B) ) ) )
So you end up with exactly what you need: A sum linear predictor for each year (row). If you haven’t
worked with much linear algebra, matrix notation can be intimidating. It is useful to remember that it
is nothing more than the mathematics you already know, but expressed in a highly compressed form
that is convenient when working with repeated calculations on lists of numbers.
4.6. Summary
This chapter introduced the simple linear regression model, a framework for estimating
the association between a predictor variable and an outcome variable. The Gaussian distri-
bution comprises the likelihood in such models, because it counts up the relative numbers of
ways different combinations of means and standard deviations can produce an observation.
To fit these models to data, the chapter introduced quadratic approximation of the posterior
distribution and the tool quap. It also introduced new procedures for visualizing posterior
distributions and posterior predictions. The next chapter expands on these concepts by in-
troducing regression models with more than one predictor variable.
The basic techniques from this chapter are the foundation of most of the examples in
later chapters. So if much of the material was new to you, it might be worth reviewing the
chapter now, before pressing onwards.
4.7. Practice
Easy.
4E1. In the model definition below, which line is the likelihood?
yi ∼Normal(µ, σ)
µ ∼Normal(0, 10)
σ ∼Exponential(1)
4E2. In the model definition just above, how many parameters are in the posterior distribution?
