110
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
the mathematics would be a more elegant approach, and there is some additional insight
that comes from knowing the mathematics, the pseudo-empirical approach presented here
is very flexible and allows a much broader audience of scientists to pull insight from their
statistical modeling. And again, when you start estimating models with MCMC (Chapter 9),
this is really the only approach available. So it’s worth learning now.
To summarize, here’s the recipe for generating predictions and intervals from the poste-
rior of a fit model.
(1) Use link to generate distributions of posterior values for µ. The default behavior
of link is to use the original data, so you have to pass it a list of new horizontal axis
values you want to plot posterior predictions across.
(2) Use summary functions like mean or PI to find averages and lower and upper
bounds of µ for each value of the predictor variable.
(3) Finally, use plotting functions like lines and shade to draw the lines and intervals.
Or you might plot the distributions of the predictions, or do further numerical
calculations with them. It’s really up to you.
This recipe works for every model we fit in the book. As long as you know the structure of
the model—how parameters relate to the data—you can use samples from the posterior to
describe any aspect of the model’s behavior.
Rethinking: Overconfident confidence intervals. The confidence interval for the regression line in
Figure 4.9 clings tightly to the MAP line. Thus there is very little uncertainty about the average
height as a function of average weight. But you have to keep in mind that these inferences are always
conditional on the model. Even a very bad model can have very tight confidence intervals. It may
help if you think of the regression line in Figure 4.9 as saying: Conditional on the assumption that
height and weight are related by a straight line, then this is the most plausible line, and these are its
plausible bounds.
Overthinking: How link works. The function link is not really very sophisticated. All it is doing
is using the formula you provided when you fit the model to compute the value of the linear model.
It does this for each sample from the posterior distribution, for each case in the data. You could
accomplish the same thing for any model, fit by any means, by performing these steps yourself. This
is how it’d look for m4.3.
R code
4.58
post <- extract.samples(m4.3)
mu.link <- function(weight) post$a + post$b*( weight - xbar )
weight.seq <- seq( from=25 , to=70 , by=1 )
mu <- sapply( weight.seq , mu.link )
mu.mean <- apply( mu , 2 , mean )
mu.CI <- apply( mu , 2 , PI , prob=0.89 )
And the values in mu.mean and mu.CI should be very similar (allowing for simulation variance) to
what you got the automated way, using link.
Knowing this manual method is useful both for (1) understanding and (2) sheer power. What-
ever the model you find yourself with, this approach can be used to generate posterior predictions for
any component of it. Automated tools like link save effort, but they are never as flexible as the code
you can write yourself.
