5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION
139
regression. None of these techniques is suitable for all jobs, and most do not generalize be-
yond linear regression. So the approach I take here is to instead help you compute whatever
you need from the model. I offer three examples of interpretive plots:
(1) Predictor residual plots. These plots show the outcome against residual predictor
values. They are useful for understanding the statistical model, but not much else.
(2) Posterior prediction plots. These show model-based predictions against raw data,
or otherwise display the error in prediction. They are tools for checking fit and
assessing predictions. They are not causal tools.
(3) Counterfactual plots. These show the implied predictions for imaginary experi-
ments. These plots allow you to explore the causal implications of manipulating
one or more variables.
Each of these plot types has its advantages and deficiencies, depending upon the context and
the question of interest. In the rest of this section, I show you how to manufacture each of
these in the context of the divorce data.
5.1.5.1. Predictor residual plots. A predictor variable residual is the average prediction
error when we use all of the other predictor variables to model a predictor of interest. That’s
a complicated concept, so we’ll go straight to the example, where it will make sense. The ben-
efit of computing these things is that, once plotted against the outcome, we have a bivariate
regression of sorts that has already “controlled” for all of the other predictor variables. It just
leaves in the variation that is not expected by the model of the mean, µ, as a function of the
other predictors.
In our multivariate model of divorce rate, we have two predictors: (1) marriage rate (M)
and (2) median age at marriage (A). To compute predictor residuals for either, we just use
the other predictor to model it. So for marriage rate, this is the model we need:
Mi ∼Normal(µi, σ)
µi = α + βAi
α ∼Normal(0, 0.2)
β ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
σ ∼Exponential(1)
As before, M is marriage rate and A is median age at marriage. Note that since we standard-
ized both variables, we already expect the mean α to be around zero, as before. So I’m reusing
the same priors as earlier. This code will approximate the posterior:
R code
5.13
m5.4 <- quap(
alist(
M ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
mu <- a + bAM * A ,
a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
bAM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
) , data = d )
And then we compute the residuals by subtracting the observed marriage rate in each State
from the predicted rate, based upon the model above:
