94
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
6 155.1772 7.974603
You end up with a data frame, post, with 10,000 (1e4) rows and two columns, one column
for µ and one for σ. Each value is a sample from the posterior, so the mean and standard
deviation of each column will be very close to the MAP values from before. You can confirm
this by summarizing the samples:
R code
4.35
precis(post)
quap posterior: 10000 samples from m4.1
mean
sd
5.5%
94.5%
histogram
mu
154.61 0.41 153.95 155.27
▁▁▁▅▇▂▁▁
sigma
7.72 0.29
7.26
8.18 ▁▁▁▂▅▇▇▃▁▁▁▁
Compare these values to the output from precis(m4.1). And you can use plot(post)
to see how much they resemble the samples from the grid approximation in Figure 4.4
(page 88).
These samples also preserve the covariance between µ and σ. This hardly matters right
now, because µ and σ don’t covary at all in this model. But once you add a predictor variable
to your model, covariance will matter a lot.
Overthinking: Under the hood with multivariate sampling. The function extract.samples is
for convenience. It is just running a simple simulation of the sort you conducted near the end of
Chapter 3. Here’s a peak at the motor. The work is done by a multi-dimensional version of rnorm,
mvrnorm. The function rnorm simulates random Gaussian values, while mvrnorm simulates random
vectors of multivariate Gaussian values. Here’s how to use it directly to do what extract.samples
does:
R code
4.36
library(MASS)
post <- mvrnorm( n=1e4 , mu=coef(m4.1) , Sigma=vcov(m4.1) )
You don’t usually need to use mvrnorm directly like this, but sometimes you want to simulate multi-
variate Gaussian outcomes. In that case, you’ll need to access mvrnorm directly. And of course it’s
always good to know a little about how the machine operates. Later on, we’ll work with posterior
distributions that cannot be correctly approximated this way.
4.4. Linear prediction
What we’ve done above is a Gaussian model of height in a population of adults. But it
doesn’t really have the usual feel of “regression” to it. Typically, we are interested in modeling
how an outcome is related to some other variable, a predictor variable. If the predictor
variable has any statistical association with the outcome variable, then we can use it to predict
the outcome. When the predictor variable is built inside the model in a particular way, we’ll
have linear regression.
So now let’s look at how height in these Kalahari foragers (the outcome variable) covaries
with weight (the predictor variable). This isn’t the most thrilling scientific question, I know.
But it is an easy relationship to start with, and if it seems dull, it’s because you don’t have
a theory about growth and life history in mind. If you did, it would be thrilling. We’ll try
