4.5. CURVES FROM LINES
113
because they depend upon different model assumptions. Furthermore, it’s possible to view the Gauss-
ian likelihood as a purely epistemological assumption (a device for estimating the mean and variance
of a variable), rather than an ontological assumption about what future data will look like. In that
case, it may not make complete sense to simulate outcomes.
Overthinking: Rolling your own sim. Just like with link, it’s useful to know a little about how
sim operates. For every distribution like dnorm, there is a companion simulation function. For the
Gaussian distribution, the companion is rnorm, and it simulates sampling from a Gaussian distribu-
tion. What we want R to do is simulate a height for each set of samples, and to do this for each value
of weight. The following will do it:
R code
4.63
post <- extract.samples(m4.3)
weight.seq <- 25:70
sim.height <- sapply( weight.seq , function(weight)
rnorm(
n=nrow(post) ,
mean=post$a + post$b*( weight - xbar ) ,
sd=post$sigma ) )
height.PI <- apply( sim.height , 2 , PI , prob=0.89 )
The values in height.PI will be practically identical to the ones computed in the main text and
displayed in Figure 4.10.
4.5. Curves from lines
In the next chapter, you’ll see how to use linear models to build regressions with more
than one predictor variable. But before then, it helps to see how to model the outcome as
a curved function of a single predictor. The models so far all assume that a straight line
describes the relationship. But there’s nothing special about straight lines, aside from their
simplicity.
We’ll consider to commonplace methods that use the same essential linear regression
approach to build curves. The first is polynomial regression. The second is b-splines.
Both approaches work by transforming a single predictor variable into several variables, us-
ing a parameter for the weight of each. But splines have some clear advantages. Neither
approach aims to do much more than describe the function that relates one variable to an-
other. Causal inference, which we’ll consider much more beginning in the next chapter,
needs more.
4.5.1. Polynomial regression. Polynomial regression uses powers of a variable—squares
and cubes—as extra predictors. This is an easy way to build curved associations. Polyno-
mial regressions are very common, and understanding how they work will help scaffold later
models. To understand how polynomial regression works, let’s work through an example,
using the full !Kung data, not just the adults:
R code
4.64
library(rethinking)
data(Howell1)
d <- Howell1
