6 The Haunted DAG & The Causal Terror
It seems like the most newsworthy scientific studies are the least trustworthy. The more
likely it is to kill you, if true, the less likely it is to be true. The more boring the topic, the
more rigorous the results. How could this widely believed negative correlation exist? There
doesn’t seem to be any reason for studies of topics that people care about to produce less
reliable results. Maybe popular topics attract more and worse researchers, like flies drawn to
the smell of honey?
Actually all that is necessary for such a negative correlation to arise is that peer reviewers
care about both newsworthiness and trustworthiness. Whether it is grant review or journal
review, if editors and reviewers care about both, then the act of selection itself is enough to
make the most newsworthy studies the least trustworthy. In fact, it’s hard to imagine how
scientific peer review could avoid creating this negative correlation. And, dear reader, this
fact will help us understand the perils of multiple regression.
Here’s a simple simulation to illustrate the point85. Suppose a grant review panel receives
200 proposals for scientific research. Among these proposals, there is no correlation at all
between trustworthiness (rigor, scholarship, plausibility of success) and newsworthiness (so-
cial welfare value, public interest). The panel weighs trustworthiness and newsworthiness
equally. Then they rank the proposals by their combined scores and select the top 10% for
funding.
At the end of this section, I show the code to simulate this thought experiment. Fig-
ure 6.1 displays the full sample of simulated proposals, with those selected in blue. I’ve
drawn a simple linear regression line through the selected proposals. There’s the negative
correlation, −0.77 in this example. Strong selection induces a negative correlation among
the criteria used in selection. Why? If the only way to cross the threshold is to score high, it is
more common to score high on one item than on both. Therefore among funded proposals,
the most newsworthy studies can actually have less than average trustworthiness (less than
0 in the figure). Similarly the most trustworthy studies can actually be less newsworthy than
average.
This general phenomenon has been recognized for a long time. It is sometimes called
Berkson’s paradox86. But it is easier to remember if we call it the selection-distortion
effect. Once you appreciate this effect, you’ll see it everywhere. Why do so many restaurants
in good locations have bad food? The only way a restaurant with less-than-good food can
survive is if it is in a nice location. Similarly, restaurants with excellent food can survive even
in bad locations. Selection-distortion ruins your city.
What does this have to do with multiple regression? Unfortunately, everything. The
previous chapter demonstrated some amazing powers of multiple regression. It can smoke
165
