4.4. LINEAR PREDICTION
101
height ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
mu <- a + b*( weight - xbar ) ,
a ~ dnorm( 178 , 20 ) ,
b ~ dlnorm( 0 , 1 ) ,
sigma ~ dunif( 0 , 50 )
) ,
data=d2 )
Rethinking: Everything that depends upon parameters has a posterior distribution. In the model
above, the parameter µ is no longer a parameter, since it has become a function of the parameters
α and β. But since the parameters α and β have a joint posterior, so too does µ. Later in the chap-
ter, you’ll work directly the posterior distribution of µ, even though it’s not a parameter anymore.
Since parameters are uncertain, everything that depends upon them is also uncertain. This includes
statistics like µ, as well as model-based predictions, measures of fit, and everything else that uses pa-
rameters. By working with samples from the posterior, all you have to do to account for posterior
uncertainty in any quantity is to compute that quantity for each sample from the posterior. The result-
ing quantities, one for each posterior sample, will approximate the quantity’s posterior distribution.
Overthinking: Logs and exps, oh my. My experience is that many natural and social scientists have
naturally forgotten whatever they once knew about logarithms. Logarithms appear all the time in
applied statistics. You can usefully think of y = log(x) as assigning to y the order of magnitude of x.
The function x = exp(y) is the reverse, turning a magnitude into a value. These definitions will make
a mathematician shriek. But much of our computational work relies only on these intuitions.
These definitions allow the Log-Normal prior for β to be coded another way. Instead of defining a
parameter β, we define a parameter that is the logarithm of β and then assign it a normal distribution.
Then we can reverse the logarithm inside the linear model. It looks like this:
R code
4.43
m4.3b <- quap(
alist(
height ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
mu <- a + exp(log_b)*( weight - xbar ),
a ~ dnorm( 178 , 20 ) ,
log_b ~ dnorm( 0 , 1 ) ,
sigma ~ dunif( 0 , 50 )
) ,
data=d2 )
Note the exp(log_b) in the definition of mu. This is the same model as m4.3. It will make the same
predictions. But instead of β in the posterior distribution, you get log(β). It is easy to translate
between the two, because β = exp(log(β)). In code form: b <- exp(log_b).
4.4.3. Interpreting the posterior distribution. One trouble with statistical models is that
they are hard to understand. Once you’ve fit the model, it can only report posterior distribu-
tion. This is the right answer to the question you asked. But it’s your responsibility to process
the answer and make sense of it.
There are two broad categories of processing: (1) reading tables and (2) plotting simu-
lations. For some simple questions, it’s possible to learn a lot just from tables of marginal
values. But most models are very hard to understand from tables of numbers alone. A major
