5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION
143
-2
-1
0
1
2
-2
-1
0
1
Observed divorce
Predicted divorce
ID
ME
RI
UT
Figure 5.5. Posterior predictive plot for the
multivariate divorce model, m5.3. The hori-
zontal axis is the observed divorce rate in each
State. The vertical axis is the model’s posterior
predicted divorce rate, given each State’s me-
dian age at marriage and marriage rate. The
blue line segments are 89% compatibility inter-
vals. The diagonal line shows where posterior
predictions exactly match the sample.
which have much lower divorce rates than the model expects them to have. The easiest way
to label a few select points is to use identify:
R code
5.17
identify( x=d$D , y=mu_mean , labels=d$Loc )
After executing the line of code above, R will wait for you to click near a point in the active
plot window. It’ll then place a label near that point, on the side you choose. When you are
done labeling points, press your right mouse button (or press esc, on some platforms).
What is unusual about Idaho and Utah? Both of these States have large proportions of
members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Members of this church have
low rates of divorce, wherever they live. This suggests that having a finer view on the demo-
graphic composition of each State, beyond just median age at marriage, would help a lot to
refine our understanding.
Rethinking: Stats, huh, yeah what is it good for? Often people want statistical modeling to do things
that statistical modeling cannot do. For example, we’d like to know whether an effect is “real” or rather
spurious. Unfortunately, modeling merely quantifies uncertainty in the precise way that the model
understands the problem. Usually answers to large world questions about truth and causation depend
upon information not included in the model. For example, any observed correlation between an out-
come and predictor could be eliminated or reversed once another predictor is added to the model.
But if we cannot think of the right variable, we might never notice. Therefore all statistical models are
vulnerable to and demand critique, regardless of the precision of their estimates and apparent accu-
racy of their predictions. Rounds of model criticism and revision embody the real tests of scientific
hypotheses. A true hypothesis will pass and fail many statistical “tests” on its way to acceptance.
Overthinking: Simulating spurious association. One way that spurious associations between a pre-
dictor and outcome can arise is when a truly causal predictor, call it xreal, influences both the outcome,
y, and a spurious predictor, xspur. This can be confusing, however, so it may help to simulate this sce-
nario and see both how the spurious data arise and prove to yourself that multiple regression can
reliably indicate the right predictor, xreal. So here’s a very basic simulation:
