102
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
difficulty with tables alone is their apparent simplicity compared to the complexity of the
model and data that generated them. Once you have more than a couple of parameters in a
model, it is very hard to figure out from numbers alone how all of them act to influence pre-
diction. This is also the reason we simulate from priors. Once you begin adding interaction
terms (Chapter 8) or polynomials (later in this chapter), it may not even be possible to guess
the direction of influence a predictor variable has on an outcome.
So throughout this book, I emphasize plotting posterior distributions and posterior pre-
dictions, instead of attempting to understand a table. Plotting the implications of your mod-
els will allow you to inquire about things that are hard to read from tables:
(1) Whether or not the model fitting procedure worked correctly
(2) The absolute magnitude, rather than merely relative magnitude, of a relationship
between outcome and predictor
(3) The uncertainty surrounding an average relationship
(4) The uncertainty surrounding the implied predictions of the model, as these are
distinct from mere parameter uncertainty
In addition, once you get the hang of processing posterior distributions into plots, you can
ask any question you can think of, for any model type. And readers of your results will
appreciate a figure much more than they will a table of estimates.
So in the remainder of this section, I first spend a little time talking about tables of esti-
mates. Then I move on to show how to plot estimates that always incorporate information
from the full posterior distribution, including correlations among parameters.
Rethinking: What do parameters mean? A basic issue with interpreting model-based estimates is
in knowing the meaning of parameters. There is no consensus about what a parameter means, how-
ever, because different people take different philosophical stances towards models, probability, and
prediction. The perspective in this book is a common Bayesian perspective: Posterior probabilities
of parameter values describe the relative compatibility of different states of the world with the data, ac-
cording to the model. These are small world (Chapter 2) numbers. So reasonable people may disagree
about the large world meaning, and the details of those disagreements depend strongly upon context.
Such disagreements are productive, because they lead to model criticism and revision, something that
golems cannot do for themselves.
In later chapters, you’ll see that parameters can refer to observable quantities—data—as well as
unobservable values. This makes parameters even more useful and their interpretation even more
context dependent.
4.4.3.1. Tables of marginal distributions. With the new linear regression trained on the
Kalahari data, we inspect the marginal posterior distributions of the parameters:
R code
4.44
precis( m4.3 )
mean
sd
5.5%
94.5%
a
154.60 0.27 154.17 155.03
b
0.90 0.04
0.84
0.97
sigma
5.07 0.19
4.77
5.38
The first row gives the quadratic approximation for α, the second the approximation for β,
and the third approximation for σ. Let’s try to make some sense of them.
