5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION
141
means the observed rate was below what the model expects. In simpler terms, States with
positive residuals have high marriage rates for their median age of marriage, while States
with negative residuals have low rates for their median age of marriage. It’ll help to plot
the relationship between these two variables, and show the residuals as well. In Figure 5.4,
upper left, I show m5.4 along with line segments for each residual. Notice that the residuals
are variation in marriage rate that is left over, after taking out the purely linear relationship
between the two variables.
Now to use these residuals, let’s put them on a horizontal axis and plot them against the
actual outcome of interest, divorce rate. In Figure 5.4 also (lower left), I plot these residu-
als against divorce rate, overlaying the linear regression of the two variables. You can think
of this plot as displaying the linear relationship between divorce and marriage rates, having
statistically “controlled” for median age of marriage. The vertical dashed line indicates mar-
riage rate that exactly matches the expectation from median age at marriage. So States to
the right of the line have higher marriage rates than expected. States to the left of the line
have lower rates. Average divorce rate on both sides of the line is about the same, and so the
regression line demonstrates little relationship between divorce and marriage rates.
The same procedure works for the other predictor. The top right plot in Figure 5.4 shows
the regression of A on M and the residuals. In the lower right, these residuals are used to
predict divorce rate. States to the right of the vertical dashed line have older-than-expected
median age at marriage, while those to the left have younger-than-expected median age at
marriage. Now we find that the average divorce rate on the right is lower than the rate on the
left, as indicated by the regression line. States in which people marry older than expected for
a given rate of marriage tend to have less divorce.
So what’s the point of all of this? There’s conceptual value in seeing the model-based
predictions displayed against the outcome, after subtracting out the influence of other pre-
dictors. The plots in Figure 5.4 do this. But this procedure also brings home the message
that regression models measure the remaining association of each predictor with the out-
come, after already knowing the other predictors. In computing the predictor residual plots,
you had to perform those calculations yourself. In the unified multivariate model, it all hap-
pens automatically. Nevertheless, it is useful to keep this fact in mind, because regressions
can behave in surprising ways as a result. We’ll have an example soon.
Linear regression models do all of this simultaneous measurement with a very specific
additive model of how the variables relate to one another. But predictor variables can be
related to one another in non-additive ways. The basic logic of statistical control does not
change in those cases, but the details definitely do, and these residual plots cease to be useful.
Luckily there are other ways to understand a model. That’s where we turn next.
Rethinking: Never use residuals as data. There is a tradition, especially in parts of biology, of using
residuals from one model as data in another model. For example, a biologist might regress brain size
on body size and then use the brain size residuals as data in another model. This procedure is always
a mistake. Residuals are not known. They are parameters, variables with unobserved values. Treating
them as known values throws away uncertainty. The right way to control for body size is to include
it in the same model, preferably a model designed with an explicit causal identification strategy.81
5.1.5.2. Posterior prediction plots. It’s important to check the model’s implied predic-
tions against the observed data. This is what you did in Chapter 3, when you simulated
