5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION
135
R code
5.9
DMA_dag1 <- dagitty('dag{ D <- A -> M -> D }')
impliedConditionalIndependencies( DMA_dag1 )
There are no conditional independencies, so there is no output to display.
Let’s try to summarize. The testable implications of the first DAG are that all pairs of vari-
ables should be associated, whatever we condition on. The testable implications of the second
DAG are that all pairs of variables should be associated, before conditioning on anything, but
that D and M should be independent after conditioning on A. So the only implication that
differs between these DAGs is the last one: D ⊥⊥M|A.
To test this implication, we need a statistical model that conditions on A, so we can see
whether that renders D independent of M. And that is what multiple regression helps with.
It can address a useful descriptive question:
Is there any additional value in knowing a variable, once I already know all of
the other predictor variables?
So for example once you fit a multiple regression to predict divorce using both marriage rate
and age at marriage, the model addresses the questions:
(1) After I already know marriage rate, what additional value is there in also knowing
age at marriage?
(2) After I already know age at marriage, what additional value is there in also knowing
marriage rate?
The parameter estimates corresponding to each predictor are the (often opaque) answers to
these questions. The questions above are descriptive, and the answers are also descriptive. It
is only the derivation of the testable implications above that give these descriptive results a
causal meaning.
Rethinking: “Control” is out of control. Very often, the question just above is spoken of as “statisti-
cal control,” as in controlling for the effect of one variable while estimating the effect of another. But
this is sloppy language, as it implies too much. Statistical control is quite different from experimental
control, as we’ll explore more in the next chapter. The point here isn’t to police language. Instead, the
point is to observe the distinction between small world and large world interpretations. Since most
people who use statistics are not statisticians, sloppy language like “control” can promote a sloppy
culture of interpretation. Such cultures tend to overestimate the power of statistical methods, so re-
sisting them can be difficult. Disciplining your own language may be enough. Disciplining another’s
language is hard to do, without seeming like a fastidious scold, as this very box must seem.
5.1.3. Multiple regression notation. Multiple regression formulas look a lot like the poly-
nomial models at the end of the previous chapter—they add more parameters and variables
to the definition of µi. The strategy is straightforward:
(1) Nominate the predictor variables you want in the linear model of the mean.
(2) For each predictor, make a parameter that will measure its association with the
outcome.
(3) Multiply the parameter by the variable and add that term to the linear model.
