182
6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-2
-1
0
1
2
age
happiness
married
unmarried
Figure 6.4. Simulated data, assuming that happiness is uniformly dis-
tributed and never changes. Each point is a person. Married individuals
are shown with filled blue points. At each age after 18, the happiest individ-
uals are more likely to be married. At later ages, more individuals tend to be
married. Marriage status is a collider of age and happiness: A →M ←H.
If we condition on marriage in a regression, it will mislead us to believe that
happiness declines with age.
Suppose you come across these data and want to ask whether age is related to happiness.
You don’t know the true causal model. But you reason, reasonably, that marriage status
might be an important confound. If married people are more or less happy, on average, then
you need to condition on marriage status in order to infer the relationship between age and
happiness.
So let’s consider a multiple regression model aimed at inferring the influence of age on
happiness, while controlling for marriage status. This is just a plain multiple regression, like
the others in this and the previous chapter. The linear model is this:
µi = αmid[i] + βAAi
where mid[i] is an index for the marriage status of individual i, with 1 meaning single and
2 meaning married. This is just the categorical variable strategy from Chapter 4. It’s easier
to make priors, when we use multiple intercepts, one for each category, than when we use
indicator variables.
Now we should do our duty and think about the priors. Let’s consider the slope βA first,
because how we scale the predictor A will determine the meaning of the intercept. We’ll
focus only on the adult sample, those 18 or over. Imagine a very strong relationship between
age and happiness, such that happiness is at its maximum at age 18 and its minimum at age
65. It’ll be easier if we rescale age so that the range from 18 to 65 is one unit. This will do it:
R code
6.22
d2 <- d[ d$age>17 , ] # only adults
d2$A <- ( d2$age - 18 ) / ( 65 - 18 )
