92
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
R code
4.30
start <- list(
mu=mean(d2$height),
sigma=sd(d2$height)
)
m4.1 <- quap( flist , data=d2 , start=start )
These start values are good guesses of the rough location of the MAP values.
Note that the list of start values is a regular list, not an alist like the formula list is. The two
functions alist and list do the same basic thing: allow you to make a collection of arbitrary R
objects. They differ in one important respect: list evaluates the code you embed inside it, while
alist does not. So when you define a list of formulas, you should use alist, so the code isn’t ex-
ecuted. But when you define a list of start values for parameters, you should use list, so that code
like mean(d2$height) will be evaluated to a numeric value.
The priors we used before are very weak, both because they are nearly flat and because
there is so much data. So I’ll splice in a more informative prior for µ, so you can see the
effect. All I’m going to do is change the standard deviation of the prior to 0.1, so it’s a very
narrow prior. I’ll also build the formula right into the call to quap, so you can see how to
build it all at once.
R code
4.31
m4.2 <- quap(
alist(
height ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
mu ~ dnorm( 178 , 0.1 ) ,
sigma ~ dunif( 0 , 50 )
) , data=d2 )
precis( m4.2 )
Mean StdDev
5.5%
94.5%
mu
177.86
0.10 177.70 178.02
sigma
24.52
0.93
23.03
26.00
Notice that the estimate for µ has hardly moved off the prior. The prior was very concentrated
around 178. So this is not surprising. But also notice that the estimate for σ has changed quite
a lot, even though we didn’t change its prior at all. Once the golem is certain that the mean
is near 178—as the prior insists—then the golem has to estimate σ conditional on that fact.
This results in a different posterior for σ, even though all we changed is prior information
about the other parameter.
4.3.6. Sampling from a quap. The above explains how to get a quadratic approximation of
the posterior, using quap. But how do you then get samples from the quadratic approxi-
mate posterior distribution? The answer is rather simple, but non-obvious, and it requires
recognizing that a quadratic approximation to a posterior distribution with more than one
parameter dimension—µ and σ each contribute one dimension—is just a multi-dimensional
Gaussian distribution.
As a consequence, when R constructs a quadratic approximation, it calculates not only
standard deviations for all parameters, but also the covariances among all pairs of param-
eters. Just like a mean and standard deviation (or its square, a variance) are sufficient to
describe a one-dimensional Gaussian distribution, a list of means and a matrix of variances
