5.2. MASKED RELATIONSHIP
155
What happened here? Why did adding neocortex and body mass to the same model
lead to larger estimated effects of both? This is a context in which there are two variables
correlated with the outcome, but one is positively correlated with it and the other is negatively
correlated with it. In addition, both of the explanatory variables are positively correlated with
one another. Try a simple pairs plot to appreciate this correlation: pairs( ~K + M + N ,
dcc ). As a result, they tend to cancel one another out.
This is another case in which multiple regression automatically finds the most revealing
cases and uses them to produce inferences. What the regression model does is ask if species
that have high neocortex percent for their body mass have higher milk energy. Likewise, the
model asks if species with high body mass for their neocortex percent have higher milk energy.
Bigger species, like apes, have milk with less energy. But species with more neocortex tend
to have richer milk. The fact that these two variables, body size and neocortex, are correlated
across species makes it hard to see these relationships, unless we account for both.
Some DAGs will help. There are at least three graphs consistent with the pattern in these
data. Here they are, and then I’ll explain each.
K
M
N
K
M
N
K
M
N
U
Beginning on the left, the first possibility is that body mass (M) influences neocortex percent
(N). Both then influence kilocalories in milk (K). Second, in the middle, neocortex could
instead influence body mass. The two variables still end up correlated in the sample. Finally,
on the right, there could be an unobserved variable U that influences both M and N, produc-
ing a correlation between them. In this book, I’ll circle variables that are unobserved. One
of the great threats to causal inference is that there are potentially very many unobserved
variables that influence an outcome. We’ll consider this more in the next chapter.
Which of these graphs is right? We can’t tell from the data alone, because these graphs
imply the same set of conditional independencies. In this case, there are no conditional
independencies—each DAG above implies that all pairs of variables are associated, regardless
of what we condition on. A set of DAGs with the same conditional independencies is known
as a Markov equivalence set. In the Overthinking box further down, I’ll show you how
to simulate observations consistent with each of these DAGs show that each can produce the
masking phenomenon, and use the dagitty package to compute the complete set of Markov
equivalent DAGs. Remember that while the data alone can never tell you which causal model
is correct, your scientific knowledge of the variables will eliminate a large number of silly, but
Markov equivalent, DAGs.
The final thing we’d like to do with these models is to finish Figure 5.9. Let’s make
counterfactual plots to show how the model sees the problem. Once we have multiple pre-
dictor variables, we can conduct counterfactual experiments that vary one predictor while
holding the others constant. In the real world, such experiments are typically impossible.
If we change an animal’s body size, natural selection will then change the other features to
match it. But these counterfactual plots do help us see how the model views the association
between each predictor and the outcome. Here is the code to produce the lower-left plot in
Figure 5.9 (page 153).
