164
5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES
5M5. One way to reason through multiple causation hypotheses is to imagine detailed mechanisms
through which predictor variables may influence outcomes. For example, it is sometimes argued that
the price of gasoline (predictor variable) is positively associated with lower obesity rates (outcome
variable). However, there are at least two important mechanisms by which the price of gas could
reduce obesity. First, it could lead to less driving and therefore more exercise. Second, it could lead to
less driving, which leads to less eating out, which leads to less consumption of huge restaurant meals.
Can you outline one or more multiple regressions that address these two mechanisms? Assume you
can have any predictor data you need.
Hard. All three exercises below use the same data, data(foxes) (part of rethinking).84 The urban
fox (Vulpes vulpes) is a successful exploiter of human habitat. Since urban foxes move in packs and
defend territories, data on habitat quality and population density is also included. The data frame has
five columns:
(1) group: Number of the social group the individual fox belongs to
(2) avgfood: The average amount of food available in the territory
(3) groupsize: The number of foxes in the social group
(4) area: Size of the territory
(5) weight: Body weight of the individual fox
5H1. Fit two bivariate Gaussian regressions, using quap: (1) body weight as a linear function of
territory size (area), and (2) body weight as a linear function of groupsize. Plot the results of these
regressions, displaying the MAP regression line and the 95% interval of the mean. Is either variable
important for predicting fox body weight?
5H2. Now fit a multiple linear regression with weight as the outcome and both area and groupsize
as predictor variables. Plot the predictions of the model for each predictor, holding the other predictor
constant at its mean. What does this model say about the importance of each variable? Why do you
get different results than you got in the exercise just above?
5H3. Finally, consider the avgfood variable. Fit two more multiple regressions: (1) body weight
as an additive function of avgfood and groupsize, and (2) body weight as an additive function of
all three variables, avgfood and groupsize and area. Compare the results of these models to the
previous models you’ve fit, in the first two exercises. (a) Is avgfood or area a better predictor of body
weight? If you had to choose one or the other to include in a model, which would it be? Support your
assessment with any tables or plots you choose. (b) When both avgfood or area are in the same
model, their effects are reduced (closer to zero) and their standard errors are larger than when they
are included in separate models. Can you explain this result?
