5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION
133
outcome like D. It could still be associated with D entirely through the indirect path. That
type of relationship is known as mediation, and we’ll have another example later.
In this example however, the indirect path does almost no work. How can we show that?
We know from m5.2 that marriage rate is positively associated with divorce rate. But that isn’t
enough to tell us that the path M →D is positive. It could be that the association between
M and D arises entirely from A’s influence on both M and D. Like this:
A
D
M
This DAG is also consistent with the posterior distributions of models m5.1 and m5.2. So
which is it? Is there a direct effect of marriage rate, or rather is age at marriage just driving
both, creating a spurious correlation between marriage rate and divorce rate?
To find out, we need to slow down and consider carefully what each DAG implies. That’s
what we’ll do next.
Overthinking: Drawing a DAG. There are several packages, whether for R or Python or another
environment, that aid with drawing and analyzing directed acyclic graphs. The one I use for examples
in this book is dagitty. It has the advantage of being both an R package and something you can use
in your internet browser or on your computer desktop. Visit http://www.dagitty.net/. To draw
the simple DAG you saw earlier in this section:
R code
5.7
library(dagitty)
dag5.1 <- dagitty( "dag {
A -> D
A -> M
M -> D
}")
coordinates(dag5.1) <- list( x=c(A=0,D=1,M=2) , y=c(A=0,D=1,M=0) )
drawdag( dag5.1 )
The -> arrows in the DAG definition indicate directions of influence. The coordinates function let’s
you layout theplot asyoulike. Youcan also let dagitty do the layout, using plot(graphLayout(dag5.1)).
The rethinking package has a DAG plotting function that allows a bit more visual control. See
?drawdag.
5.1.2. Testable implications. How do we use data to compare multiple, plausible causal
models? The first thing to consider are the testable implications of each model. Con-
sider the two DAGs we have so far considered:
A
D
M
A
D
M
