180
6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR
Rerun the models from earlier, models m6.7 and m6.8, using the data in d2 now. You’ll see
that including fungus again confounds inference about the treatment, this time by making
it seem like it helped the plants, even though it had no effect.
This result is rather mysterious. Why should M have this effect? The next section is all
about effects like this.
Rethinking: Model selection doesn’t help. In the next chapter, you’ll learn about model selection
using information criteria. Like other model comparison and selection schemes, these criteria help in
contrasting and choosing model structure. But such approaches are no help in the example presented
just above, since the model that includes fungus both fits the sample better and would make better
out-of-sample predictions. Model m6.7 misleads because it asks the wrong question, not because it
would make poor predictions. As argued in Chapter 1, prediction and causal inference are just not
the same task. No statistical procedure can substitute for scientific knowledge and attention to it. We
need multiple models because they help us understand causal paths, not just so we can choose one or
another for prediction.
6.3. Collider bias
At the start of the chapter, I argued that all that is necessary for scientific studies to
show a negative association between trustworthiness and newsworthiness is that selection
processes—grant and journal review—care about both. Now I want to explain how this same
selection phenomenon can happen inside a statistical model. When it does, it can seriously
distort our inferences, a phenomenon known as collider bias.
Let’s consider a DAG for this example. The model is that trustworthiness (T) and news-
worthiness (N) are statistically independent in the population research proposals submitted
to grant review panels. Both of them influence selection (S) for funding. This is the graph:
N
S
T
The fact that two arrows enter S means it is a collider. The core concept is easy to under-
stand: When you condition on a collider, it creates statistical—but not necessarily causal—
associations among its causes. In this case, once you learn that a proposal has been selected
(S), then learning its trustworthiness (T) also provides information about its newsworthiness
(N). Why? Because if, for example, a selected proposal has low trustworthiness, then it must
have high newsworthiness. Otherwise it wouldn’t have been funded. The same works in re-
verse: If a proposal has low newsworthiness, we’d infer that it must have higher than average
trustworthiness. Otherwise it would not have been selected for funding.
This is the informational phenomenon that generates the negative association between T
and N in the population of selected proposals. And it means we have to pay attention to pro-
cesses that select our sample of observations and may distort associations among variables.
But the same phenomenon will also generate a misleading association inside a statistical
model, when you include the collider as a predictor variable. If you are not careful, you can
make an erroneous causal inference. Let’s consider an extended example.
6.3.1. Collider of false sorrow. Consider the question of how aging influences happiness. If
we have a large survey of people rating how happy they are, is age associated with happiness?
