170
6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR
And the posterior distribution in this simulated example has done exactly that: It has
produced a good estimate of the sum of bl and br. Here’s how you can compute the posterior
distribution of their sum, and then plot it:
R code
6.6
sum_blbr <- post$bl + post$br
dens( sum_blbr , col=rangi2 , lwd=2 , xlab="sum of bl and br" )
And the resulting density plot is shown on the right-hand side of Figure 6.2. The posterior
mean is in the right neighborhood, a little over 2, and the standard deviation is much smaller
than it is for either component of the sum, bl or br. If you fit a regression with only one of
the leg length variables, you’ll get approximately the same posterior mean:
R code
6.7
m6.2 <- quap(
alist(
height ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
mu <- a + bl*leg_left,
a ~ dnorm( 10 , 100 ) ,
bl ~ dnorm( 2 , 10 ) ,
sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
) ,
data=d )
precis(m6.2)
mean
sd 5.5% 94.5%
a
1.00 0.28 0.54
1.45
bl
1.99 0.06 1.89
2.09
sigma 0.62 0.04 0.55
0.69
That 1.99 is almost identical to the mean value of sum_blbr.
You’ll get slightly different results in your own simulation, due to random variation
across simulations. But the basic lesson remains intact across different simulations: When
two predictor variables are very strongly correlated, including both in a model may lead to con-
fusion. The posterior distribution isn’t wrong, in such cases. It’s telling you that the question
you asked cannot be answered with these data. And that’s a great thing for a model to say,
that it cannot answer your question. And if you are just interested in prediction, you’ll find
that this leg model makes fine predictions. It just doesn’t make any claims about which leg
is more important.
This leg example is clear and cute. But it is also purely statistical. We aren’t asking any
serious causal questions here. Let’s try a more causally interesting example next.
6.1.2. Multicollinear milk. In the leg length example, it’s easy to see that including both legs
in the model is a little silly. But the problem that arises in real data sets is that we may not
anticipate a clash between highly correlated predictors. And therefore we may mistakenly
read the posterior distribution to say that neither predictor is important. In this section, we
look at an example of this issue with real data.
Let’s return to the primate milk data from earlier in the chapter. Let’s get back the original
data again:
