4.3. GAUSSIAN MODEL OF HEIGHT
89
Now that you have these samples, you can describe the distribution of confidence in each
combination of µ and σ by summarizing the samples. Think of them like data and describe
them, just like in Chapter 3. For example, to characterize the shapes of the marginal posterior
densities of µ and σ, all we need to do is:
R code
4.21
dens( sample.mu )
dens( sample.sigma )
The jargon “marginal” here means “averaging over the other parameters.” Execute the above
code and inspect the plots. These densities are very close to being normal distributions.
And this is quite typical. As sample size increases, posterior densities approach the normal
distribution. If you look closely, though, you’ll notice that the density for σ has a longer
right-hand tail. I’ll exaggerate this tendency a bit later, to show you that this condition is
very common for standard deviation parameters.
To summarize the widths of these densities with posterior compatibility intervals, just
like in Chapter 3:
R code
4.22
PI( sample.mu )
PI( sample.sigma )
Since these samples are just vectors of numbers, you can compute any statistic from them that
you could from ordinary data. If you want the mean or median, just use the corresponding
R functions.
Overthinking: Sample size and the normality of σ’s posterior. Before moving on to using quadratic
approximation (quap) as shortcut to all of this inference, it is worth repeating the analysis of the height
data above, but now with only a fraction of the original data. The reason to do this is to demonstrate
that, in principle, the posterior is not always so Gaussian in shape. There’s no trouble with the mean,
µ. For a Gaussian likelihood and a Gaussian prior on µ, the posterior distribution is always Gaussian
as well, regardless of sample size. It is the standard deviation σ that causes problems. So if you care
about σ—often people do not—you do need to be careful of abusing the quadratic approximation.
The deep reasons for the posterior of σ tending to have a long right-hand tail are complex. But
a useful way to conceive of the problem is that variances must be positive. As a result, there must be
more uncertainty about how big the variance (or standard deviation) is than about how small it is.
For example, if the variance is estimated to be near zero, then you know for sure that it can’t be much
smaller. But it could be a lot bigger.
Let’s quickly analyze only 20 of the heights from the height data to reveal this issue. To sample
20 random heights from the original list:
R code
4.23
d3 <- sample( d2$height , size=20 )
Now I’ll repeat all the code from the previous subsection, modified to focus on the 20 heights in d3
rather than the original data. I’ll compress all of the code together, but it’s just what you’ve already
seen above.
R code
4.24
mu.list <- seq( from=150, to=170 , length.out=200 )
sigma.list <- seq( from=4 , to=20 , length.out=200 )
post2 <- expand.grid( mu=mu.list , sigma=sigma.list )
post2$LL <- sapply( 1:nrow(post2) , function(i)
sum( dnorm( d3 , mean=post2$mu[i] , sd=post2$sigma[i] ,
