128
5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES
0
10
20
30
40
50
6
8
10
12
14
Waffle Houses per million
Divorce rate
AL
AR
GA
ME
NJ
OK
SC
Figure 5.1. The number of Waffle House
diners per million people is associated with
divorce rate (in the year 2009) within the
United States. Each point is a State. “South-
ern” (former Confederate) States shown in
blue.
Shaded region is 89% percentile in-
terval of the mean.
These data are in
data(WaffleDivorce) in the rethinking
package.
type of influence, we should. Furthermore, when causation is multiple, one cause
can hide another.
(3) Interactions. The importance of one variable may depend upon another. For ex-
ample, plants benefit from both light and water. But in the absence of either, the
other is no benefit at all. Such interactions occur very often. Effective inference
about one variable will often depend upon consideration of others.
In this chapter, we begin to deal with the first of these two, using multiple regression to
deal with simple confounds and to take multiple measurements of association. You’ll see how
to include any arbitrary number of main effects in your linear model of the Gaussian mean.
These main effects are additive combinations of variables, the simplest type of multiple vari-
able model. We’ll focus on two valuable things these models can help us with: (1) revealing
spurious correlations like the Waffle House correlation with divorce and (2) revealing impor-
tant correlations that may be masked by unrevealed correlations with other variables. Along
the way, you’ll meet categorical variables, which require special handling compared
to continuous variables.
However, multiple regression can be worse than useless, if we don’t know how to use it.
Just adding variables to a model can do a lot of damage. So in this chapter, we’ll begin to
think formally about causal inference and introduce graphical causal models as a way to
design and interpret regression models. The next chapter continues on this theme, describing
some serious and common dangers of adding predictor variables, ending with a unifying
framework for understanding the examples in both this chapter and the next.
Rethinking: Causal inference. Despite its central importance, there is no unified approach to causal
inference yet in the sciences or in statistics. There are even people who argue that cause does not
really exist; it’s just a psychological illusion.79 And in complex dynamical systems, everything seems
to cause everything else. “Cause” loses intuitive value. About one thing, however, there is general
agreement: Causal inference always depends upon unverifiable assumptions. Another way to say
this is that it’s always possible to imagine some way in which your inference about cause is mistaken,
no matter how careful the design or analysis. A lot can be accomplished, despite this barrier.80
