96
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
Here’s how it works, in the simplest case of only one predictor variable. We’ll wait until
the next chapter to confront more than one predictor. Recall the basic Gaussian model:
hi ∼Normal(µ, σ)
[likelihood]
µ ∼Normal(178, 20)
[µ prior]
σ ∼Uniform(0, 50)
[σ prior]
Now how do we get weight into a Gaussian model of height? Let x be the name for the
column of weight measurements, d2$weight. Let the average of the x values be ¯x, “ex bar”.
Now we have a predictor variable x, which is a list of measures of the same length as h. To get
weight into the model, we define the mean µ as a function of the values in x. This is what it
looks like, with explanation to follow:
hi ∼Normal(µi, σ)
[likelihood]
µi = α + β(xi −¯x)
[linear model]
α ∼Normal(178, 20)
[α prior]
β ∼Normal(0, 10)
[β prior]
σ ∼Uniform(0, 50)
[σ prior]
Again, I’ve labeled each line on the right-hand side by the type of definition it encodes. We’ll
discuss each in turn.
4.4.1.1. Probability of the data. Let’s begin with just the probability of the observed
height, the first line of the model. This is nearly identical to before, except now there is a
little index i on the µ as well as the h. You can read hi as “each h” and µi as “each µ.” The
mean µ now depends upon unique values on each row i. So the little i on µi indicates that
the mean depends upon the row.
4.4.1.2. Linear model. The mean µ is no longer a parameter to be estimated. Rather, as
seen in the second line of the model, µi is constructed from other parameters, α and β, and
the observed variable x. This line is not a stochastic relationship—there is no ∼in it, but
rather an = in it—because the definition of µi is deterministic. That is to say that, once we
know α and β and xi, we know µi with certainty.
The value xi is just the weight value on row i. It refers to the same individual as the
height value, hi, on the same row. The parameters α and β are more mysterious. Where did
they come from? We made them up. The parameters µ and σ are necessary and sufficient to
describe a Gaussian distribution. But α and β are instead devices we invent for manipulating
µ, allowing it to vary systematically across cases in the data.
You’ll be making up all manner of parameters as your skills improve. One way to under-
stand these made-up parameters is to think of them as targets of learning. Each parameter is
something that must be described in the posterior distribution. So when you want to know
something about the data, you ask your golem by inventing a parameter for it. This will make
more and more sense as you progress. Here’s how it works in this context. The second line
of the model definition is just:
µi = α + β(xi −¯x)
What this tells the regression golem is that you are asking two questions about the mean of
the outcome.
