4.4. LINEAR PREDICTION
99
logarithms, that’s okay. I’ll show each step. There’s more detail in the box at the end of this
section.
Defining β as Log-Normal(0,1) means to claim that the logarithm of β has a Normal(0,1)
distribution. Plainly:
β ∼Log-Normal(0, 1)
R provides the dlnorm and rlnorm densities for working with log-normal distributions. You
can simulate this relationship to see what this means for β:
R code
4.40
b <- rlnorm( 1e4 , 0 , 1 )
dens( b , xlim=c(0,5) , adj=0.1 )
If the logarithm of β is normal, then β itself is strictly positive. The reason is that exp(x)
is greater than zero for any real number x. This is the reason that Log-Normal priors are
commonplace. They are an easy way to enforce positive relationships. So what does this
earn us? Do the prior predictive simulation again, now with the Log-Normal prior:
R code
4.41
set.seed(2971)
N <- 100
# 100 lines
a <- rnorm( N , 178 , 20 )
b <- rlnorm( N , 0 , 1 )
Plotting as before produces the right-hand plot in Figure 4.5. This is much more sensible.
There is still a rare impossible relationship. But nearly all lines in the joint prior for α and β
are now within human reason.
We’re fussing about this prior, even though as you’ll see in the next section there is so
much data in this example that the priors end up not mattering. We fuss for two reasons.
First, there are many analyses in which no amount of data makes the prior irrelevant. In such
cases, non-Bayesian procedures are no better off. They also depend upon structural features
of the model. Paying careful attention to those features is essential. Second, thinking about
the priors helps us develop better models, maybe even eventually going beyond geocentrism.
Rethinking: What’s the correct prior? People commonly ask what the correct prior is for a given
analysis. The question sometimes implies that for any given set of data, there is a uniquely correct
prior that must be used, or else the analysis will be invalid. This is a mistake. There is no more a
uniquely correct prior than there is a uniquely correct likelihood. Statistical models are machines for
inference. Many machines will work, but some work better than others. Priors can be wrong, but
only in the same sense that a kind of hammer can be wrong for building a table.
In choosing priors, there are simple guidelines to get you started. Priors encode states of infor-
mation before seeing data. So priors allow us to explore the consequences of beginning with different
information. In cases in which we have good prior information that discounts the plausibility of some
parameter values, like negative associations between height and weight, we can encode that informa-
tion directly into priors. When we don’t have such information, we still usually know enough about
the plausible range of values. And you can vary the priors and repeat the analysis in order to study
how different states of initial information influence inference. Frequently, there are many reasonable
choices for a prior, and all of them produce the same inference. And conventional Bayesian priors
are conservative, relative to conventional non-Bayesian approaches. We’ll see how this conservatism
arises in Chapter 7.
