132
5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES
To make sense of this, we’re going to have to think causally. And then, only after we’ve
done some thinking, a bigger regression model that includes both age at marriage and mar-
riage rate will help us.
5.1.1. Think before you regress. There are three observed variables in play: divorce rate
(D), marriage rate (M), and the median age at marriage (A) in each State. The pattern we
see in the previous two models and illustrated in Figure 5.2 is symptomatic of a situation in
which only one of the predictor variables, A in this case, has a causal impact on the outcome,
D, even though both predictor variables are strongly associated with the outcome.
To understand this better, it is helpful to introduce a particular type of causal graph
known as a DAG, short for directed acyclic graph. Graph means it is nodes and con-
nections. Directed means the connections have arrows that indicate directions of causal in-
fluence. And acyclic means that causes do not eventually flow back on themselves. A DAG
is a way of describing qualitative causal relationships among variables. It isn’t as detailed as
a full model description, but it contains information that a purely statistical model does not.
Unlike a statistical model, a DAG, if it is correct, will tell you the consequences of intervening
to change a variable.
Here is a DAG for our divorce rate example:
A
D
M
If you want to see the code to draw this, see the Overthinking box at the end of this section. It
may not look like much, but this type of diagram does a lot of work. It represents a heuristic
causal model. Like other models, it is an analytical assumption. The symbols A, M, and D
are our observed variables. The arrows show directions of influence. What this DAG says is:
(1) A directly influences D
(2) M directly influences D
(3) A directly influences M
These statements can then have further implications. In this case, because A →M and M →
D, age of marriage influences divorce in two ways. First it can have a direct effect, perhaps
because younger people change faster than older people and are therefore more likely to
grow incompatible with a partner. Second, it can have an indirect effect by influencing the
marriage rate. If people get married earlier, then the marriage rate may rise, because there
are more young people. Consider for example if an evil dictator forced everyone to marry
at age 65. Since a smaller fraction of the population lives to 65 than to 25, forcing delayed
marriage will also reduce the marriage rate. If marriage rate itself has any direct effect on
divorce, maybe by making marriage more or less normative, then some of that direct effect
could be the indirect effect of age at marriage.
To infer the strength of these different arrows, we need more than one statistical model.
Model m5.1, the regression of D on A, tells us only that the total influence of age at marriage is
strongly negative with divorce rate. The “total” here means we have to account for every path
from A to D. There are two such paths in this graph: A →D, a direct path, and A →M →D,
an indirect path. In general, it is possible that a variable like A has no direct effect at all on an
