112
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
140
150
160
170
180
weight
height
Figure 4.10. 89% prediction interval for
height, as a function of weight. The solid line
is the average line for the mean height at each
weight. The two shaded regions show different
89% plausible regions. The narrow shaded in-
terval around the line is the distribution of µ.
The wider shaded region represents the region
within which the model expects to find 89%
of actual heights in the population, at each
weight.
The code above uses some objects computed in previous sections, so go back and execute
that code, if you need to.
In Figure 4.10, I plot the result. The wide shaded region in the figure represents the
area within which the model expects to find 89% of actual heights in the population, at each
weight. There is nothing special about the value 89% here. You could plot the boundary for
other percents, such as 67% and 97% (also both primes), and add those to the plot. Doing so
would help you see more of the shape of the predicted distribution of heights. I leave that as
an exercise for the reader. Just go back to the code above and add prob=0.67, for example,
to the call to PI. That will give you 67% intervals, instead of 89% ones.
Notice that the outline for the wide shaded interval is a little rough. This is the simulation
variance in the tails of the sampled Gaussian values. If it really bothers you, increase the
number of samples you take from the posterior distribution. The optional n parameter for
sim.height controls how many samples are used. Try for example:
R code
4.62
sim.height <- sim( m4.3 , data=list(weight=weight.seq) , n=1e4 )
height.PI <- apply( sim.height , 2 , PI , prob=0.89 )
Run the plotting code again, and you’ll see the shaded boundary smooth out some. With
extreme percentiles, it can be very hard to get out all of the roughness. Luckily, it hardly
matters, except for aesthetics. Moreover, it serves to remind us that all statistical inference
is approximate. The fact that we can compute an expected value to the 10th decimal place
does not imply that our inferences are precise to the 10th decimal place.
Rethinking: Two kinds of uncertainty. In the procedure above, we encountered both uncertainty
in parameter values and uncertainty in a sampling process. These are distinct concepts, even though
they are processed much the same way and end up blended together in the posterior predictive simu-
lation. The posterior distribution is a ranking of the relative plausibilities of every possible combina-
tion of parameter values. The distribution of simulated outcomes, like height, is instead a distribution
that includes sampling variation from some process that generates Gaussian random variables. This
sampling variation is still a model assumption. It’s no more or less objective than the posterior distri-
bution. Both kinds of uncertainty matter, at least sometimes. But it’s important to keep them straight,
