4.4. LINEAR PREDICTION
97
(1) What is the expected height when xi = ¯x? The parameter α answers this question,
because when xi = ¯x, µi = α. For this reason, α is often called the intercept. But we
should think not in terms of some abstract line, but rather in terms of the meaning
with respect to the observable variables.
(2) What is the change in expected height, when xi changes by 1 unit? The parameter
β answers this question. It is often called a “slope,” again because of the abstract
line. Better to think of it as a rate of change in expectation.
Jointly these two parameters ask the golem to find a line that relates x to h, a line that passes
through α when xi = ¯x and has slope β. That is a task that golems are very good at. It’s up
to you, though, to be sure it’s a good question.
Rethinking: Nothing special or natural about linear models. Note that there’s nothing special about
the linear model, really. You can choose a different relationship between α and β and µ. For example,
the following is a perfectly legitimate definition for µi:
µi = α exp(−βxi)
This does not define a linear regression, but it does define a regression model. The linear relationship
we are using instead is conventional, but nothing requires that you use it. It is very common in some
fields, like ecology and demography, to use functional forms for µ that come from theory, rather than
the geocentrism of linear models. Models built out of substantive theory can dramatically outperform
linear models of the same phenomena.74 We’ll revisit this point later in the book.
Overthinking: Units and regression models. Readers who had a traditional training in physical
sciences will know how to carry units through equations of this kind. For their benefit, here’s the
model again (omitting priors for brevity), now with units of each symbol added.
hicm ∼Normal(µicm, σcm)
µicm = αcm + β cm
kg (xikg −¯xkg)
So you can see that β must have units of cm/kg in order for the mean µi to have units of cm. One of
the facts that labeling with units clears up is that a parameter like β is a kind of rate—centimeters per
kilogram. There’s also a tradition called dimensionless analysis that advocates constructing variables
so that they are unit-less ratios. In this context, for example, we might divide height by a reference
height, removing its units. Measurement scales are arbitrary human constructions, and sometimes
the unit-less analysis is more natural and general.
4.4.1.3. Priors. The remaining lines in the modeldefine distributionsfor theunobserved
variables. These variables are commonly known as parameters, and their distributions as pri-
ors. There are three parameters: α, β, and σ. You’ve seen priors for α and σ before, although
α was called µ back then.
The prior for β deserves explanation. Why have a Gaussian prior with mean zero? This
prior places just as much probability below zero as it does above zero, and when β = 0,
weight has no relationship to height. To figure out what this prior implies, we have to simulate
the prior predictive distribution. There is no other reliable way to understand.
The goal is to simulate heights from the model, using only the priors. First, let’s consider
a range of weight values to simulate over. The range of observed weights will do fine. Then
