84
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
model definition, and you’ll be able to see why we must bother with them. So don’t ignore
the i, even if it seems like useless ornamentation right now.
Rethinking: Independent and identically distributed. The short model above is sometimes de-
scribed as assuming that the values hi are independent and identically distributed, which may be ab-
breviated i.i.d., iid, or IID. You might even see the same model written:
hi
iid∼Normal(µ, σ).
“iid” indicates that each value hi has the same probability function, independent of the other h values
and using the same parameters. A moment’s reflection tells us that this is hardly ever true, in a physical
sense. Whether measuring the same distance repeatedly or studying a population of heights, it is hard
to argue that every measurement is independent of the others. For example, heights within families
are correlated because of alleles shared through recent shared ancestry.
The i.i.d. assumption doesn’t have to seem awkward, however, as long as you remember that
probability is inside the golem, not outside in the world. The i.i.d. assumption is about how the golem
represents its uncertainty. It is an epistemological assumption. It is not a physical assumption about
the world, an ontological one, unless you insist that it is. E. T. Jaynes (1922–1998) called this the mind
projection fallacy, the mistake of confusing epistemological claims with ontological claims.70
The point isn’t to say epistemology trumps reality, but rather that in ignorance of such correla-
tions the most conservative distribution to use is i.i.d.71 This issue will return in Chapter 10. Further-
more, there is a mathematical result known as de Finetti’s theorem that tells us that values which are
exchangeable can be approximated by mixtures of i.i.d. distributions. Colloquially, exchangeable
values can be reordered. The practical impact of this is that “i.i.d.” as an assumption cannot be read
too literally, as different process models again correspond to the same statistical model (as argued in
Chapter 1). Even furthermore, there are many types of correlation that do little or nothing to the over-
all shape of a distribution, but only affect the precise sequence in which values appear. For example,
pairs of sisters have highly correlated heights. But the overall distribution of female height remains
almost perfectly normal. In such cases, i.i.d. remains perfectly useful, despite ignoring the correla-
tions. Consider for example that Markov chain Monte Carlo (Chapter 9) can use highly correlated
sequential samples to estimate most any iid distribution we like.
To complete the model, we’re going to need some priors. The parameters to be estimated
are both µ and σ, so we need a prior Pr(µ, σ), the joint prior probability for all parameters.
In most cases, priors are specified independently for each parameter, which amounts to as-
suming Pr(µ, σ) = Pr(µ) Pr(σ). Then we can write:
hi ∼Normal(µ, σ)
[likelihood]
µ ∼Normal(178, 20)
[µ prior]
σ ∼Uniform(0, 50)
[σ prior]
The labels on the right are not part of the model, but instead just notes to help you keep track
of the purpose of each line. The prior for µ is a broad Gaussian prior, centered on 178cm,
with 95% of probability between 178 ± 40.
Why 178 cm? Your author is 178 cm tall. And the range from 138 cm to 218 cm encom-
passes a huge range of plausible mean heights for human populations. So domain-specific
information has gone into this prior. Everyone knows something about human height and
can set a reasonable and vague prior of this kind. But in many regression problems, as you’ll
see later, using prior information is more subtle, because parameters don’t always have such
clear physical meaning.
