6.1. MULTICOLLINEARITY
173
They are almost substitutes for one another. As a result, when you include both in a regres-
sion, the posterior distribution ends up describing a long ridge of combinations of bF and
bL that are equally plausible. In the case of the fat and lactose, these two variables form
essentially a single axis of variation. The easiest way to see this is to use a pairs plot:
R code
6.11
pairs( ~ kcal.per.g + perc.fat + perc.lactose , data=d , col=rangi2 )
I display this plot in Figure 6.3. Along the diagonal, the variables are labeled. In each scat-
terplot off the diagonal, the vertical axis variable is the variable labeled on the same row and
the horizontal axis variable is the variable labeled in the same column. For example, the
two scatterplots in the first row in Figure 6.3 are kcal.per.g (vertical) against perc.fat
(horizontal) and then kcal.per.g (vertical) against perc.lactose (horizontal). Notice
that percent fat is positively correlated with the outcome, while percent lactose is negatively
correlated with it. Now look at the right-most scatterplot in the middle row. This plot is the
scatter of percent fat (vertical) against percent lactose (horizontal). Notice that the points
line up almost entirely along a straight line. These two variables are negatively correlated,
and so strongly so that they are nearly redundant. Either helps in predicting kcal.per.g,
but neither helps much once you already know the other.
In the scientific literature, you might encounter a variety of dodgy ways of coping with
multicollinearity. Few of them take a causal perspective. Some fields actually teach students
to inspect pairwise correlations before fitting a model, to identify and drop highly correlated
predictors. This is a mistake. Pairwise correlations are not the problem. It is the conditional
associations—not correlations—that matter. And even then, the right thing to do will de-
pend upon what is causing the collinearity. The associations within the data alone are not
enough to decide what to do.
What is likely going on in the milk example is that there is a core tradeoff in milk com-
position that mammal mothers must obey. If a species nurses often, then the milk tends to
be watery and low in energy. Such milk is high in sugar (lactose). If instead a species nurses
rarely, in short bouts, then the milk needs to be higher in energy. Such milk is very high in
fat. This implies a causal model something like this:
D
F
K
L
The central tradeoff decides how dense, D, the milk needs to be. We haven’t observed this
variable, so it’s shown circled. Then fat, F, and lactose, L, are determined. Finally, the com-
position of F and L determines the kilocalories, K. If we could measure D, or had an evolu-
tionary and economic model to predict it based upon other aspects of a species, that would
be better than stumbling through regressions. We’d just regression K on D, ignoring the
mediating L and F, to estimate the causal influence of density on energy.
The problem of multicollinearity is a member of a family of problems with fitting models,
a family sometimes known as non-identifiability. When a parameter is non-identifiable,
it means that the structure of the data and model do not make it possible to estimate the
parameter’s value. Sometimes this problem arises from mistakes in coding a model, but
many important types of models present non-identifiable or weakly identifiable parameters,
