4.5. CURVES FROM LINES
117
) ,
data=d )
Computing the curve and intervals is similarly a small modification of the previous code.
This cubic curve is even more flexible than the parabola, so it fits the data even better.
But it’s not clear that any of these models make a lot of sense. They are good geocentric
descriptions of the sample, yes. But there are two clear problems. First, a better fit to the
sample might not actually be a better model. That’s the subject of Chapter 7. Second, the
model contains no biological information, so we aren’t learning anything about any causal
relationship between height and weight. We’ll deal with this second problem much later in
the book, in Chapter 16.
Rethinking: Linear, additive, funky. The parabolic model of µi above is still a “linear model” of
the mean, even though the equation is clearly not of a straight line. Unfortunately, the word “linear”
means different things in different contexts, and different people use it differently in the same context.
What “linear” means in this context is that µi is a linear function of any single parameter. Such models
have the advantage of being easier to fit to data. They are also often easier to interpret, because they
assume that parameters act independently on the mean. They have the disadvantage of being strongly
conventional. They are often used thoughtlessly. When you have real knowledge of your study system,
it is often easy to do better than a linear model. These models are geocentric engines, devices for
describing partial correlations among variables. We should feel embarrassed to use them, just so we
don’t become satisfied with the phenomenological explanations they provide.
Overthinking: Converting back to natural scale. The plots in Figure 4.11 have standard units on
the horizontal axis. These units are sometimes called z-scores. But suppose you fit the model using
standardized variables, but want to plot the estimates on the original scale. All that’s really needed is
first to turn off the horizontal axis when you plot the raw data:
R code
4.70
plot( height ~ weight_s , d , col=col.alpha(rangi2,0.5) , xaxt="n" )
The xaxt at the end there turns off the horizontal axis. Then you explicitly construct the axis, using
the axis function.
R code
4.71
at <- c(-2,-1,0,1,2)
labels <- at*sd(d$weight) + mean(d$weight)
axis( side=1 , at=at , labels=round(labels,1) )
The first line above defines the location of the labels, in standardized units. The second line then takes
those units and converts them back to the original scale. The third line draws the axis. Take a look at
the help ?axis for more details.
4.5.2. Splines. The second way to introduce a curve is to construct something known as
a spline. The word spline originally referred to a long, thin piece of wood or metal that
could be anchored in a few places in order to aid drafters or designers in drawing curves. In
statistics, a spline is a smooth function built out of smaller, component functions. There are
actually many types of splines. The b-spline we’ll look at here are the most common and
