120
4. GEOCENTRIC MODELS
In the middle plot in Figure 4.12, I show each basis function multiplied by its corre-
sponding weight parameter. I got these weights by fitting the model to the data. I’ll show
you how to do that in a moment. But focus on the figure for now. Weight parameters can
be positive or negative. So for example basis functions 2 and 4 end up below the zero line.
They have negative weights. To construct a prediction for any given year, say for example
1306 again, we just add up these weighted basis functions at that year. In the year 1306, only
basis functions 2 and 3 influence prediction.
Finally, in the bottom plot of Figure 4.12, I display the spline, as a 97% posterior interval
for µ, over the raw temperature data. This isn’t yet a very good approximation. There are
two things we can do to improve it. First, we can use more knots. The more knots, the
more flexible the spline. Second, instead of linear approximations, we can use higher degree
polynomials.
Let’s build up the code that will let you reproduce the plots in Figure 4.12, but also let
you change the knots and degree to anything you like. First, we choose the knots. Remem-
ber, the knots are just values of year that serve as pivots for our spline. Where should the
knots go? There are different ways to answer this question.76 You can, in principle, put the
knots wherever you like. Their locations are part of the model, and you are responsible for
them. Let’s do something simple. It is often useful to place knots at different evenly-spaced
quantiles of the predictor variable. For example, you might use 0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and
100%. This gives you more knots where there are more observations. In the temperature
data, the variable year is uniformly distributed. So using even quantiles will give us evenly
spaced years. We used only 5 knots in the first example. Now let’s go for 15. This code will
define a list of knot positions:
R code
4.73
d2 <- d[ complete.cases(d$temp) , ] # complete cases on temp
num_knots <- 15
knot_list <- quantile( d2$year , probs=seq(0,1,length.out=num_knots) )
Go ahead and inspect knot_list to see that it contains 15 evenly spaced dates, covering the
full range of the data.
The next choice is polynomial degree. This determines how basis functions combine,
which determines how the parameters interact to produce the spline. For degree one, as in
Figure 4.12, two basis functions combine at each point. For degree two, three functions
combine at each point. For degree 3, four combine. R already has a nice function that will
build you basis functions for any list of knots and degree you choose. This code will construct
the necessary basis functions for a degree 3, cubic, spline:
R code
4.74
library(splines)
B <- bs(d2$year,
knots=knot_list[-c(1,num_knots)] ,
degree=3 , intercept=TRUE )
The matrix B should have 1124 rows and 17 columns. Each row is a year, corresponding to
the rows in the d2 data frame. Each column is a basis function, one of our synthetic variables
defining a span of years within which a corresponding parameter will influence prediction.
To display the basis functions, just plot each column against year:
