8.1. BUILDING AN INTERACTION
243
predictor variable to change depending upon some other variable, but they are also estimat-
ing aspects of the distribution of those changes. This may sound like genius, or madness, or
both. Regardless, you can’t have the power of multilevel modeling without it.
Models that allow for complex interactions are easy to fit to data. But they can be con-
siderably harder to understand. And so I spend this chapter reviewing simple interaction
effects: how to specify them, how to interpret them, and how to plot them. The chapter
starts with a case of an interaction between a single categorical (indicator) variable and a
single continuous variable. In this context, it is easy to appreciate the sort of hypothesis that
an interaction allows for. Then the chapter moves on to more complex interactions between
multiple continuous predictor variables. These are harder. In every section of this chapter,
the model predictions are visualized, averaging over uncertainty in parameters.
Interactions are common, but they are not easy. My hope is that this chapter lays a solid
foundation for interpreting generalized linear and multilevel models in later chapters.
Rethinking: Statistics all-star, Abraham Wald. The World War II bombers story is the work of Abra-
ham Wald (1902–1950). Wald was born in what is now Romania, but immigrated to the United States
after the Nazi invasion of Austria. Wald made many contributions over his short life. Perhaps most
germane to the current material, Wald proved that for many types of rules for making statistical de-
cisions, there will exist a Bayesian rule that is at least as good as any non-Bayesian one. Wald proved
this, remarkably, beginning with non-Bayesian premises, and so anti-Bayesians could not ignore it.
This work was summarized in Wald’s 1950 book, published just before his death.130 Wald died much
too young, from a plane crash while touring India.
8.1. Building an interaction
Africa is special. The second largest continent, it is the most culturally and genetically
diverse. Africa has about 3 billion fewer people than Asia, but it has just as many living lan-
guages. Africa is so genetically diverse that most of the genetic variation outside of Africa
is just a subset of the variation within Africa. Africa is also geographically special, in a puz-
zling way: Bad geography tends to be related to bad economies outside of Africa, but African
economies may actually benefit from bad geography.
To appreciate the puzzle, look at regressions of terrain ruggedness—a particular kind of
bad geography—against economic performance (log GDP131 per capita in the year 2000),
both inside and outside of Africa (Figure 8.2). The variable rugged is a Terrain Rugged-
ness Index132 that quantifies the topographic heterogeneity of a landscape. The outcome
variable here is the logarithm of real gross domestic product per capita, from the year 2000,
rgdppc_2000. We use the logarithm of it, because the logarithm of GDP is the magnitude
of GDP. Since wealth generates wealth, it tends to be exponentially related to anything that
increases it. This is like saying that the absolute distances in wealth grow increasingly large,
as nations become wealthier. So when we work with logarithms instead, we can work on
a more evenly spaced scale of magnitudes. Regardless, keep in mind that a log transform
loses no information. It just changes what we the model assumes about the shape of the as-
sociation between variables. In this case, raw GDP is not linearly associated with anything,
because of its exponential pattern. But log GDP is linearly associated with lots of things.
What is going on in this figure? It makes sense that ruggedness is associated with poorer
countries, in most of the world. Rugged terrain means transport is difficult. Which means
market access is hampered. Which means reduced gross domestic product. So the reversed
