242
8. CONDITIONAL MANATEES
Figure 8.1. top: Dorsal scars for 5 adult Florida manatees. Rows of short
scars, for example on the individuals Africa and Flash, are indicative of pro-
peller laceration. bottom: Three exemplars of damage on A.W.38 bombers
returning from missions.
Simple linear models frequently fail to provide enough conditioning, however. Every
model so far in this book has assumed that each predictor has an independent association
with the mean of the outcome. What if we want to allow the association to be conditional?
For example, in the primate milk data from the previous chapters, suppose the relationship
between milk energy and brain size varies by taxonomic group (ape, monkey, prosimian).
This is the same as suggesting that the influence of brain size on milk energy is conditional
on taxonomic group. The linear models of previous chapters cannot address this question.
To model deeper conditionality—where the importance of one predictor depends upon
another predictor—we need interaction (also known as moderation). Interaction is
a kind of conditioning, a way of allowing parameters (really their posterior distributions)
to be conditional on further aspects of the data. The simplest kind of interaction, a linear
interaction, is built by extending the linear modeling strategy to parameters within the lin-
ear model. So it is akin to placing epicycles on epicycles in the Ptolemaic and Kopernikan
models. It is descriptive, but very powerful.
More generally, interactions are central to most statistical models beyond the cozy world
of Gaussian outcomes and linear models of the mean. In generalized linear models (GLMs,
Chapter 10 and onwards), even when one does not explicitly define variables as interacting,
they will always interact to some degree. Multilevel models induce similar effects. Common
sorts of multilevel models are essentially massive interaction models, in which estimates (in-
tercepts and slopes) are conditional on clusters (person, genus, village, city, galaxy) in the
data. Multilevel interaction effects are complex. They’re not just allowing the impact of a
