260
8. CONDITIONAL MANATEES
To build in an interaction between water and shade, we need to construct µ so that the
impact of changing either water or shade depends upon the value of the other variable. For
example, if water is low, then decreasing the shade (increase light) can’t help as much as when
water is high. So we want the slope of water, βW, to be conditional on shade. Likewise for
shade being conditional on water (remember Buridan’s interaction, 254). How can we do
this?
In the previous example, terrain ruggedness, we made a slope conditional on the value of
a category. When there are, in principle, an infinite number of categories, then it’s harder. In
this case, the “categories” of shade and water are, in principle, infinite and ordered. We only
observed three levels of water, but the model should be able to make a prediction with a water
level intermediate between any two of the observed ones. With continuous interactions, the
problem isn’t so much the infinite part but rather the ordered part. Even if we only cared
about the three observed values, we’d still need to preserve the ordering, which is bigger
than which. So what to do?
The conventional answer is to reapply the original geocentrism that justifies a linear re-
gression. When we have two variable, an outcome and a predictor, and we wish to model
the mean of the outcome such that it is conditional on the value of a continuous predictor x,
we can use a linear model: µi = α + βxi. Now in order to make the slope β conditional on
yet another variable, we can just recursively apply the same trick.
For brevity, let Wi and Si be the centered variables. Then if we define the slope βW with
its own linear model γW:
µi = α + γW,iWi + βSSi
γW,i = βW + βWSSi
Now γW,i is the slope defining how quickly blooms change with water level. The parameter
βW is the rate of change, when shade is at its mean value. And βWS is the rate change in γW,i
as shade changes—the slope for shade on the slope of water. Remember, it’s turtles all the
way down. Note the i in γW,i—it depends upon the row i, because it has Si in it.
We also want to allow the association with shade, βS, to depend upon water. Luckily,
because of the symmetry of simple interactions, we get this for free. There is just no way
to specify a simple, linear interaction in which you can say the effect of some variable x
depends upon z but the effect of z does not depend upon x. I explain this in more detail in
the Overthinking box at the end of this section. The impact of this is that it is conventional
to substitute γW,i into the equation for µi and just state:
µi = α + (βW + βWSSi)
|
{z
}
γW,i
Wi + βSSi = α + βWWi + βSSi + βWSSiWi
And that’s the conventional form of a continuous interaction, with the extra term on the far
right end holding the product of the two variables.
Let’s put this to work on the tulips. The interaction model is:
Bi ∼Normal(µi, σ)
µi = α + βWWi + βSSi + βWSWiSi
The last thing we need is a prior for this new interaction parameter, βWS. This is hard, because
these epicycle parameters don’t have clear natural meaning. Still, implied predictions help.
Suppose the strongest plausible interaction is one in which high enough shade makes water
