9.3. HAMILTONIAN MONTE CARLO
277
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (or Hybrid Monte Carlo, HMC) pushes Jaynes’ principle
much further. HMC is more computationally costly than Metropolis or Gibbs sampling. But
its proposals are also much more efficient. As a result, HMC doesn’t need as many samples to
describe the posterior distribution. You need less computer time in total, even though each
sample needs more. And as models become more complex—thousands or tens of thousands
of parameters—HMC can really outshine other algorithms, because the other algorithms just
won’t work. The Earth would be swallowed by the Sun before your chain produces a reliable
approximation of the posterior.
We’re going to be using HMC on and off for the remainder of this book. You won’t
have to implement it yourself. But understanding some of the concept behind it will help
you grasp how it outperforms Metropolis and Gibbs sampling and also how it encounters its
own, unique problems.
9.3.1. Another parable. Suppose King Markov’s cousin Monty is King on the mainland.
Monty’s kingdom is not a discrete set of islands. Instead, it is a continuous territory stretched
out along a narrow valley, running north-south. But the King has a similar obligation: to
visit his citizens in proportion to their local population density. Within the valley, people
distribute themselves inversely proportional to elevation—most people live in the middle of
the valley, fewer up the mountainside. How can King Monty fulfill his royal obligation?
Like Markov, Monty doesn’t wish to bother with schedules and calculations. Also like
Markov, Monty has a highly educated and mathematically gifted advisor, named Hamilton.
Hamilton designed an odd, but highly efficient, method. And this method solves one of
Metropolis’ flaws—the king hardly ever stays in the same place, but keeps moving on to visit
new locations.
Here’s how it works. The king’s vehicle picks random direction, either north or south, and
drives off at a random momentum. As the vehicle goes uphill, it slows down and turns around
when its declining momentum forces it to. Then it picks up speed again on the way down.
After a fixed period of time, they stop the vehicle, get out, and start shaking hands and kissing
babies. Then they get back in the vehicle and begin again. Amazingly, Hamilton can prove
mathematically that this procedure guarantees that, in the long run, the locations visited will
be inversely proportional to their relative elevations, which are also inversely proportional
to the population densities. Not only does this keep the king moving, but it also spaces
the locations apart better—unlike the other king, Monty does not only visit neighboring
locations.
This mad plan is illustrated, and simulated, in Figure 9.5. The horizontal axis is time.
The vertical axis is location. The king’s journey starts on the far left, in the middle of the
valley. The vehicle begins by heading south. The width of the curve indicates the momentum
at each time. The vehicle climbs up hill but slows and briefly turns around before stopping
at the first location. Then again and again new locations are chosen in the same way, but
with different random directions and momentums, departing from the most recent location.
When the initial momentum is small, the vehicle starts to turn around earlier. But when the
initial momentum is large, like in the big swing around time 300, the king can traverse the
entire valley before stopping.
The autocorrelation between locations visited is very low under this strategy. This
means that adjacent locations have a very low, almost zero correlation. The king can move
from one end of the valley to another. This stands in contrast to the highly autocorrelated
movement under the Metropolis plan (Figure 9.2). King Markov of the Islands might wish
