206
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
body mass (kg)
brain volume (cc)
35
47
60
450
900
1300
m7.1
body mass (kg)
brain volume (cc)
35
47
60
0
900
2000
m7.4
Figure 7.4. Underfitting and overfitting as under-sensitivity and over-
sensitivity to sample. In both plots, a regression is fit to the seven sets of
data made by dropping one row from the original data. Left: An underfit
model is insensitive to the sample, changing little as individual points are
dropped. Right: An overfit model is sensitive to the sample, changing dra-
matically as points are dropped.
7.2. Entropy and accuracy
So how do we navigate between the hydra of overfitting and the vortex of underfitting?
Whether you end up using regularization or information criteria or both, the first thing you
must do is pick a criterion of model performance. What do you want the model to do well
at? We’ll call this criterion the target, and in this section you’ll see how information theory
provides a common and useful target.
The path to out-of-sample deviance is twisty, however. Here are the steps ahead. First,
we need to establish a measurement scale for distance from perfect accuracy. This will re-
quire a little information theory, as it will provide a natural measurement scale for the dis-
tance between two probability distributions. Second, we need to establish deviance as an
approximation of relative distance from perfect accuracy. Finally, we must establish that it
is only deviance out-of-sample that is of interest. Once you have deviance in hand as a mea-
sure model performance, in the sections to follow you’ll see how both regularizing priors and
information criteria help you improve and estimate the out-of-sample deviance of a model.
This material is complicated. You don’t have to understand everything at first.
7.2.1. Firing the weatherperson. Accuracy depends upon the definition of the target, and
there is no universally best target. In defining a target, there are two major dimensions to
worry about:
(1) Cost-benefit analysis. How much does it cost when we’re wrong? How much do we
win when we’re right? Most scientists never ask these questions in any formal way,
but applied scientists must routinely answer them.
