198
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
30
40
50
60
70
600
800
1000
1200
body mass (kg)
brain volume (cc)
afarensis
africanus
habilis
boisei
rudolfensis
ergaster
sapiens
Figure 7.2. Average brain volume in cubic
centimeters against body mass in kilograms,
for six hominin species. What model best de-
scribes the relationship between brain size and
body size?
fit of a model to the data.96 By “fit” I mean a measure of how well the model can retrodict
the data used to fit the model. There are many such measures, each with its own foibles. In
the context of linear Gaussian models, R2 is the most common measure of this kind. Often
described as “variance explained,” R2 is defined as:
R2 = var(outcome) −var(residuals)
var(outcome)
= 1 −var(residuals)
var(outcome)
Being easy to compute, R2 is popular. But like other measures of fit to sample, R2 increases as
more predictor variables are added. This is true even when the variables you add to a model
are just random numbers, with no relation to the outcome. So it’s no good to choose among
models using only fit to the data.
Second, while more complex models fit the data better, they often predict new data
worse. Models that have many parameters tend to overfit more than simpler models. This
means that a complex model will be very sensitive to the exact sample used to fit it, leading
to potentially large mistakes when future data is not exactly like the past data. But simple
models, with too few parameters, tend instead to underfit, systematically over-predicting or
under-predicting the data, regardless of how well future data resemble past data. So we can’t
always favor either simple models or complex models.
Let’s examine both of these issues in the context of a simple example.
7.1.1. More parameters (almost) always improve fit. Overfitting occurs when a model
learns too much from the sample. What this means is that there are both regular and irregular
features in every sample. The regular features are the targets of our learning, because they
generalize well or answer a question of interest. Regular features are useful, given an objective
of our choice. The irregular features are instead aspects of the data that do not generalize and
so may mislead us.
Overfitting happens automatically, unfortunately. In the kind of statistical models we’ve
seen so far in this book, adding additional parameters will always improve the fit of a model to
the sample. Much later in the book, beginning with Chapter 13, you’ll meet models for which
adding parameters does not necessarily improve fit to the sample, but may well improve
predictive accuracy.
