7.7. PRACTICE
239
7.6. Summary
This chapter has been a marathon. It began with the problem of overfitting, a univer-
sal phenomenon by which models with more parameters fit a sample better, even when the
additional parameters are meaningless. Two common tools were introduced to address over-
fitting: regularizing priors and estimates of out-of-sample accuracy (WAIC and PSIS). Reg-
ularizing priors reduce overfitting during estimation, and WAIC and PSIS help estimate the
degree of overfitting. Practical functions compare in the rethinking package were intro-
duced to help analyze collections of models fit to the same data. If you are after causal esti-
mates, then these tools will mislead you. So models must be designed through some other
method, not selected on the basis of out-of-sample predictive accuracy. But any causal esti-
mate will still overfit the sample. So you always have to worry about overfitting, measuring
it with WAIC/PSIS and reducing it with regularization.
7.7. Practice
Easy.
7E1. State the three motivating criteria that define information entropy. Try to express each in your
own words.
7E2. Suppose a coin is weighted such that, when it is tossed and lands on a table, it comes up heads
70% of the time. What is the entropy of this coin?
7E3. Suppose a four-sided die is loaded such that, when tossed onto a table, it shows “1” 20%, “2”
25%, ”3” 25%, and ”4” 30% of the time. What is the entropy of this die?
7E4. Suppose another four-sided die is loaded such that it never shows “4”. The other three sides
show equally often. What is the entropy of this die?
Medium.
7M1. Write down and compare the definitions of AIC and WAIC. Which of these criteria is most
general? Which assumptions are required to transform the more general criterion into a less general
one?
7M2. Explain the difference between model selection and model comparison. What information is
lost under model selection?
7M3. When comparing models with an information criterion, why must all models be fit to exactly
the same observations? What would happen to the information criterion values, if the models were
fit to different numbers of observations? Perform some experiments, if you are not sure.
7M4. What happens to the effective number of parameters, as measured by PSIS or WAIC, as a prior
becomes more concentrated? Why? Perform some experiments, if you are not sure.
7M5. Provide an informal explanation of why informative priors reduce overfitting.
7M6. Provide an informal explanation of why overly informative priors result in underfitting.
