280
9. MARKOV CHAIN MONTE CARLO
between visits in Figure 9.5—is divided up into a number of leapfrog steps. If you choose
many steps, the paths will be long. If you choose few, they will be short. The size of each step
is determined by, you guessed it, the step size. The step size determines a how fine grained
the simulation is. If the step size is small, then the particle can turn sharply. If the step size is
large, then each leap will be large and could even overshoot the point where the simulation
would want to turn around.
Let’s put it all together in Figure 9.6. The code to reproduce this figure is in the Over-
thinking box below. The left simulation uses L = 11 leapfrog steps, each with a step size of
ϵ = 0.03. The contours show the log-posterior. It’s a symmetric bowl in this example. Only
4 samples from the posterior distribution are shown. The chain begins at the ×. The first
simulation gets flicked to the right and rolls downhill and then uphill again, stopping on the
other side and taking a sample at the point labeled 1. The width of the path shows the total
momentum, the kinetic energy, at each point.144 Each leapfrog step is indicated by the white
dots along the path. The process repeats, with random direction and momentum in both di-
mensions each time. You could take 100 samples here and get an excellent approximation
with very low autocorrelation.
However, that low autocorrelation is not automatic. The righthand plot in Figure 9.6
shows the same code but with L = 28 leapfrog steps. Now because of the combination of
leapfrog steps and step size, the paths tend to land close to where they started. Instead of in-
dependent samples from the posterior, we get correlated samples, like in a Metropolis chain.
This problem is called the U-turn problem—the simulations turn around and return to the
same neighborhood. The U-turn problem looks especially bad in this example, because the
posterior is a perfect 2-dimensional Gaussian bowl. So the parabolic paths always loop back
onto themselves. In most models, this won’t be the case. But you’ll still get paths return-
ing close to where they started. This just shows that the efficiency of HMC comes with the
expense of having to tune the leapfrog steps and step size in each application.
Fancy HMC samplers, like Stan and its rstan package, have two ways to deal with U-
turns. First, they will choose the leapfrog steps and step size for you. They can do this by
conducting a warmup phase in which they try to figure out which step size explores the
posterior efficiently. If you are familiar with older algorithms like Gibbs sampling, which use
a burn-in phase, warmup is not like burn-in. Technically, burn-in samples are just samples.
They are part of the posterior. But Stan’s warmup phase, for example, does not produce
useful samples. It is just tuning the simulation. The warmup phase tends to be slower than
the sampling phase. So when you start using Stan, and warmup seems to be slow, in most
cases it will speed up a lot as time goes on.
The second thing fancy HMC samplers do is use a clever algorithm to adaptively set the
number of leapfrog steps. These algorithms are called no-U-turn samplers, or NUTS. A
no-U-turn sampler guess from the shape of the posterior when the path is turning around.
Then it stops the simulation. The details are both complicated and amazing.145 Stan currently
(as of version 2.17) uses a second-generation NUTS2 sampler. See the Stan manual for more.
Overthinking: Hamiltonian Monte Carlo in the raw. The HMC algorithm needs five things to go:
(1) a function U that returns the negative log-probability of the data at the current position (parameter
values), (2) a function grad_U that returns the gradient of the negative log-probability at the current
position, (3) a step size epsilon, (4) a count of leapfrog steps L, and (5) a starting position current_q.
Keep in mind that the position is a vector of parameter values and that the gradient also needs to
return a vector of the same length. So that these U and grad_U functions make more sense, let’s
