266
8. CONDITIONAL MANATEES
8H3. Consider again the data(rugged) data on economic development and terrain ruggedness,
examined in this chapter. One of the African countries in that example, Seychelles, is far outside
the cloud of other nations, being a rare country with both relatively high GDP and high ruggedness.
Seychelles is also unusual, in that it is a group of islands far from the coast of mainland Africa, and
its main economic activity is tourism.
(a) Focus on model m8.5 from the chapter. Use WAIC pointwise penalties and PSIS Pareto k
values to measure relative influence of each country. By these criteria, is Seychelles influencing the
results? Are there other nations that are relatively influential? If so, can you explain why?
(b) Now use robust regression, as described in the previous chapter. Modify m8.5 to use a
Student-t distribution with ν = 2. Does this change the results in a substantial way?
8H4. The values in data(nettle) are data on language diversity in 74 nations.136 The meaning of
each column is given below.
(1) country: Name of the country
(2) num.lang: Number of recognized languages spoken
(3) area: Area in square kilometers
(4) k.pop: Population, in thousands
(5) num.stations: Number of weather stations that provided data for the next two columns
(6) mean.growing.season: Average length of growing season, in months
(7) sd.growing.season: Standard deviation of length of growing season, in months
Use these data to evaluate the hypothesis that language diversity is partly a product of food se-
curity. The notion is that, in productive ecologies, people don’t need large social networks to buffer
them against risk of food shortfalls. This means ethnic groups can be smaller and more self-sufficient,
leading to more languages per capita. In contrast, in a poor ecology, there is more subsistence risk,
and so human societies have adapted by building larger networks of mutual obligation to provide
food insurance. This in turn creates social forces that help prevent languages from diversifying.
Specifically, you will try to model the number of languages per capita as the outcome variable:
R code
8.27
d$lang.per.cap <- d$num.lang / d$k.pop
Use the logarithm of this new variable as your regression outcome. (A count model would be better
here, but you’ll learn those later, in Chapter 11.)
This problem is open ended, allowing you to decide how you address the hypotheses and the
uncertain advice the modeling provides. If you think you need to use WAIC anyplace, please do. If
you think you need certain priors, argue for them. If you think you need to plot predictions in a
certain way, please do. Just try to honestly evaluate the main effects of both mean.growing.season
and sd.growing.season, as well as their two-way interaction, as outlined in parts (a), (b), and (c)
below. If you are not sure which approach to use, try several.
(a) Evaluate the hypothesis that language diversity, as measured by log(lang.per.cap), is pos-
itively associated with the average length of the growing season, mean.growing.season. Consider
log(area) in your regression(s) as a covariate (not an interaction). Interpret your results.
(b) Now evaluate the hypothesis that language diversity is negatively associated with the stan-
dard deviation of length of growing season, sd.growing.season. This hypothesis follows from
uncertainty in harvest favoring social insurance through larger social networks and therefore fewer
languages. Again, consider log(area) as a covariate (not an interaction). Interpret your results.
(c) Finally, evaluate the hypothesis that mean.growing.season and sd.growing.season in-
teract to synergistically reduce language diversity. The idea is that, in nations with longer average
growing seasons, high variance makes storage and redistribution even more important than it would
