262
8. CONDITIONAL MANATEES
decode the posterior into something else. Centered predictors or not, plotting posterior pre-
dictions always tells you what the golem is thinking, on the scale of the outcome. That’s why
we’ve emphasized plotting so much. But in previous chapters, there were no interactions. As
a result, when plotting model predictions as a function of any one predictor, you could hold
the other predictors constant at any value you liked. So the choice of which values to set the
un-viewed predictor variables to hardly mattered.
Now that’ll be different. Once there are interactions in a model, the effect of changing
a predictor depends upon the values of the other predictors. Maybe the simplest way to go
about plotting such interdependency is to make a frame of multiple bivariate plots. In each
plot, you choose different values for the un-viewed variables. Then by comparing the plots
to one another, you can see how big of a difference the changes make.
That’s what we did for the terrain ruggedness example. But there we needed only two
plots, one for Africa and one for everyplace else. Now we’ll need more. Here’s how you
might accomplish this visualization, for the tulip data. I’m going to make three plots in a
single panel. Such a panel of three plots that are meant to be viewed together is a triptych,
and triptych plots are very handy for understanding the impact of interactions. Here’s the
strategy. We want each plot to show the bivariate relationship between water and blooms,
as predicted by the model. Each plot will plot predictions for a different value of shade. For
this example, it is easy to pick which three values of shade to use, because there are only
three values: −1, 0, and 1. But more generally, you might use a representative low value, the
median, and a representative high value.
Here’s the code to draw posterior predictions for m8.4, the non-interaction model. This
will loop over three values for shade, compute posterior predictions, then draw 20 lines from
the posterior.
R code
8.25
par(mfrow=c(1,3)) # 3 plots in 1 row
for ( s in -1:1 ) {
idx <- which( d$shade_cent==s )
plot( d$water_cent[idx] , d$blooms_std[idx] , xlim=c(-1,1) , ylim=c(0,1) ,
xlab="water" , ylab="blooms" , pch=16 , col=rangi2 )
mu <- link( m8.4 , data=data.frame( shade_cent=s , water_cent=-1:1 ) )
for ( i in 1:20 ) lines( -1:1 , mu[i,] , col=col.alpha("black",0.3) )
}
The result is shown in Figure 8.7, along with the same type of plot for the interaction model,
m8.5. Notice that the top model believes that water helps—there is a positive slope in each
plot—and that shade hurts—the lines sink lower moving from left to right. But the slope
with water doesn’t vary across shade levels. Without the interaction, it cannot vary. In the
bottom row, the interaction is turned on. Now the model believes that the effect of water
decreases as shade increases. The lines get flat.
What is going on here? The likely explanation for these results is that tulips need both
water and light to produce blooms. At low light levels, water can’t have much of an effect,
because the tulips don’t have enough light to produce blooms. At higher light levels, water
can matter more, because the tulips have enough light to produce blooms. At very high light
levels, light is no longer limiting the blooms, and so water can have a much more dramatic
impact on the outcome. The same explanation works symmetrically for shade. If there isn’t
enough light, then more water hardly helps. You could remake Figure 8.7 with shade on the
