7.5. MODEL COMPARISON
229
between the models that is useful, not the absolute value of the deviance. Nor do cross-validation and
information criteria require that the data generating model be one of the models being considered.
That was true in our simulations. But it isn’t a requirement for them to help in identifying good
models for prediction.
But the train-test prediction task is not representative of everything we might wish to do with
models. For example, some statisticians prefer to evaluate predictions using a prequential frame-
work, in which models are judged on their accumulated learning error over the training sample.122
And once you start using multilevel models, “prediction” is no longer uniquely defined, because the
test sample can differ from the training sample in ways that forbid use of some the parameter esti-
mates. We’ll worry about that issue in Chapter 13.
Perhaps a larger concern is that our train-test thought experiment pulls the test sample from
exactly the same process as the training sample. This is a kind of uniformitarian assumption, in which
future data are expected to come from the same process as past data and have the same rough range of
values. This can cause problems. For example, suppose we fit a regression that predicts height using
body weight. The training sample comes from a poor town, in which most people are pretty thin.
The relationship between height and weight turns out to be positive and strong. Now also suppose
our prediction goal is to guess the heights in another, much wealthier, town. Plugging the weights
from the wealthy individuals into the model fit to the poor individuals will predict outrageously tall
people. The reason is that, once weight becomes large enough, it has essentially no relationship with
height. WAIC will not automatically recognize nor solve this problem. Nor will any other isolated
procedure. But over repeated rounds of model fitting, attempts at prediction, and model criticism, it
is possible to overcome this kind of limitation. As always, statistics is no substitute for science.
7.5. Model comparison
Let’s review the original problem and the road so far. When there are several plausible
(and hopefully un-confounded) models for the same set of observations, how should we com-
pare the accuracy of these models? Following the fit to the sample is no good, because fit will
always favor more complex models. Information divergence is the right measure of model
accuracy, but even it will just lead us to choose more and more complex and wrong models.
We need to somehow evaluate models out-of-sample. How can we do that? A meta-model of
forecasting tells us two important things. First, flat priors produce bad predictions. Regular-
izing priors—priors which are skeptical of extreme parameter values—reduce fit to sample
but tend to improve predictive accuracy. Second, we can get a useful guess of predictive ac-
curacy with the criteria CV, PSIS, and WAIC. Regularizing priors and CV/PSIS/WAIC are
complementary. Regularization reduces overfitting, and predictive criteria measure overfit-
ting.
That’s the road so far, the conceptual journey. And that’s the hardest part. Using tools
like PSIS and WAIC is much easier than understanding them. Which makes them quite
dangerous. That is why this chapter has spent so much time on foundations, without doing
any actual data analysis.
Now let’s do some analysis. How do we use regularizing priors and CV/PSIS/WAIC?
A very common use of cross-validation and information criteria is to perform model se-
lection, which means choosing the model with the lowest criterion value and then dis-
carding the others. But you should never do this. This kind of selection procedure dis-
cards the information about relative model accuracy contained in the differences among the
CV/PSIS/WAIC values. Why are the differences useful? Because sometimes the differences
