234
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
combining the predictions of multiple models. For the sake of space, we won’t cover it in
this book. But see the endnote for some places to start.123
Rethinking: WAIC metaphors. Here are two metaphors to help explain the concepts behind using
WAIC (or another information criterion) to compare models.
Think of models as race horses. In any particular race, the best horse may not win. But it’s more
likely to win than is the worst horse. And when the winning horse finishes in half the time of the
second-place horse, you can be pretty sure the winning horse is also the best. But if instead it’s a photo-
finish, with a near tie between first and second place, then it is much harder to be confident about
which is the best horse. WAIC values are analogous to these race times—smaller values are better,
and the distances between the horses/models are informative. Akaike weights transform differences
in finishing time into probabilities of being the best model/horse on future data/races. But if the track
conditions or jockey changes, these probabilities may mislead. Forecasting future racing/prediction
based upon a single race/fit carries no guarantees.
Think of models as stones thrown to skip on a pond. No stone will ever reach the other side
(perfect prediction), but some sorts of stones make it farther than others, on average (make better
test predictions). But on any individual throw, lots of unique conditions avail—the wind might pick
up or change direction, a duck could surface to intercept the stone, or the thrower’s grip might slip. So
which stone will go farthest is not certain. Still, the relative distances reached by each stone therefore
provide information about which stone will do best on average. But we can’t be too confident about
any individual stone, unless the distances between stones is very large.
Of course neither metaphor is perfect. Metaphors never are. But many people find these to be
helpful in interpreting information criteria.
7.5.2. Outliers and other illusions. In the divorce example from Chapter 5, we saw in the
posterior predictions that a few States were very hard for the model. The State of Idaho in
particular was something of an outlier (page 5.5). Individual points like Idaho tend to be
very influential in ordinary regression models. Let’s see how PSIS and WAIC represent that
importance. Begin by refitting the three divorce models from Chapter 5.
R code
7.32
library(rethinking)
data(WaffleDivorce)
d <- WaffleDivorce
d$A <- standardize( d$MedianAgeMarriage )
d$D <- standardize( d$Divorce )
d$M <- standardize( d$Marriage )
m5.1 <- quap(
alist(
D ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
mu <- a + bA * A ,
a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
bA ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
) , data = d )
m5.2 <- quap(
alist(
D ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
