236
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
PSIS Pareto k
WAIC penalty
ID
ME
Gaussian model (m5.3)
Figure 7.10. Highly influential points and
out-of-sample prediction. The horizontal axis
is Pareto k from PSIS. The vertical axis is
WAIC’s penalty term. The State of Idaho (ID)
has an extremely unlikely value, according to
the model. As a result it has both a very high
Pareto k and a large WAIC penalty. Points
like these are highly influential and potentially
hurt prediction.
observation on a row and the PSIS information, including individual Pareto k values, in
columns. I’ll also plot the individual “penalty” values from WAIC, to show the relationship
between Pareto k and the information theoretic prediction penalty.
R code
7.34
set.seed(24071847)
PSIS_m5.3 <- PSIS(m5.3,pointwise=TRUE)
set.seed(24071847)
WAIC_m5.3 <- WAIC(m5.3,pointwise=TRUE)
plot( PSIS_m5.3$k , WAIC_m5.3$penalty , xlab="PSIS Pareto k" ,
ylab="WAIC penalty" , col=rangi2 , lwd=2 )
This plot is shown in Figure 7.10. Individual points are individual States, with Pareto k on
the horizontal axis and WAIC’s penalty term. The State of Idaho (ID, upper-right corner)
has both a very high Pareto k value (above 1) and a large pentalty term (over 2). As you saw
back in Chapter 5, Idaho has a very low divorce rate for its age at marriage. As a result, it
is highly influential—it exerts more influence on the posterior distribution than other States
do. The Pareto k value is double the theoretical point at which the variance becomes infinite
(shown by the dashed line). Likewise, WAIC assigns Idaho a penalty over 2. This penalty
term is sometimes called the “effective number of parameters,” because in ordinary linear
regressions the sum of all penalty terms from all points tends to be equal to the number of
free parameters in the model. But in this case there are 4 parameters and the total penalty is
closer to 6—check WAIC(m5.3). The outlier Idaho is causing this additional overfitting risk.
What can be done about this? There is a tradition of dropping outliers. People some-
times drop outliers even before a model is fit, based only on standard deviations from the
mean outcome value. You should never do that—a point can only be unexpected and highly
influential in light of a model. After you fit a model, the picture changes. If there are only a
few outliers, and you are sure to report results both with and without them, dropping outliers
might be okay. But if there are several outliers and we really need to model them, what then?
A basic problem here is that the Gaussian error model is easily surprised. Gaussian
distributions (introduced at the start of Chapter 4) have very thin tails. This means that very
little probability mass is given to observations far from the mean. Many natural phenomena
do have very thin tails like this. Human height is a good example. But many phenomena do
