7 Ulysses’ Compass
Mikołaj Kopernik (also known as Nicolaus Copernicus, 1473–1543): Polish astronomer,
ecclesiastical lawyer, and blasphemer. Famous for his heliocentric model of the solar sys-
tem, Kopernik argued for replacing the geocentric model, because the heliocentric model
was more “harmonious.” This position eventually lead (decades later) to Galileo’s famous
disharmony with, and trial by, the Church.
This story has become a fable of science’s triumph over ideology and superstition. But
Kopernik’s justification looks poor to us now, ideology aside. There are two problems: The
model was neither particularly harmonious nor more accurate than the geocentric model.
The Copernican model was very complicated. In fact, it had similar epicycle clutter as the
Ptolemaic model (Figure 7.1). Kopernik had moved the Sun to the center, but since he still
used perfect circles for orbits, he still needed epicycles. And so “harmony” doesn’t quite
describe the model’s appearance. Just like the Ptolemaic model, the Kopernikan model was
effectively a Fourier series, a means of approximating periodic functions. This leads to the
second problem: The heliocentric model made exactly the same predictions as the geocentric
model. Equivalent approximations can be constructed whether the Earth is stationary or
rather moving. So there was no reason to prefer it on the basis of accuracy alone.
Kopernik didn’t appeal just to some vague harmony, though. He also argued for the
superiority of his model on the basis of needing fewer causes: “We thus follow Nature, who
producing nothing in vain or superfluous often prefers to endow one cause with many ef-
fects.”94 And it was true that a heliocentric model required fewer circles and epicycles to
make the same predictions as a geocentric model. In this sense, it was simpler.
Scholars often prefer simpler theories. This preference is sometimes vague—a kind of
aesthetic preference. Other times we retreat to pragmatism, preferring simpler theories be-
cause their simpler models are easier to work with. Frequently, scientists cite a loose princi-
ple known as Ockham’s razor: Models with fewer assumptions are to be preferred. In the
case of Kopernik and Ptolemy, the razor makes a clear recommendation. It cannot guarantee
that Kopernik was right (he wasn’t, after all), but since the heliocentric and geocentric mod-
els make the same predictions, at least the razor offers a clear resolution to the dilemma. But
the razor can be hard to use more generally, because usually we must choose among models
that differ in both their accuracy and their simplicity. How are we to trade these different
criteria against one another? The razor offers no guidance.
This chapter describes some of the most commonly used tools for coping with this trade-
off. Some notion of simplicity usually features in all of these tools, and so each is commonly
compared to Ockham’s razor. But each tool is equally about improving predictive accuracy.
So they are not like the razor, because they explicitly trade-off accuracy and simplicity.
195
