9.3. HAMILTONIAN MONTE CARLO
279
there isn’t much information in the likelihood and the priors are rather flat, then the particle
can glide for a long time before the slope (gradient) makes it turn around. When instead the
log-posterior is very steep, because either the likelihood or the priors are very concentrated,
then the particle doesn’t get far before turning around.
In principle, HMC will always accept every proposal, because it only makes intelligent
proposals. In practice, HMC uses a rejection criterion, because it is only approximating
the smooth path of a particle. It isn’t unusual to see acceptance rates over 95% with HMC.
Making smart proposals pays. What is the rejection criterion? Because HMC runs a physics
simulation, certain things have to be conserved, like total energy of the system. When the
total energy changes during the simulation, that means the numerical approximation is bad.
When the approximation isn’t good, it might reject the proposal.
All of this sounds, and is, complex. But what is gained from all of this complexity is very
efficient sampling of complex models. In cases where ordinary Metropolis or Gibbs sam-
pling wander slowly through parameter space, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo remains efficient.
This is especially true when working with multilevel models with hundreds or thousands of
parameters. A particle in 1000-dimension space sounds crazy, but it’s not harder for your
compute to imagine than a particle in 3-dimensions.
To take some of magic out of this, let’s do a two-dimensional simulation, for a simple
posterior distribution with two parameters, the mean and standard deviation of a Gaussian.
I’m going to show just the most minimal mathematical details. You don’t need to grasp all
the mathematics to make use of HMC. But having some intuition about how it works will
help you appreciate why it works so much better than other approaches, as well as why it
sometimes doesn’t work. If you want much more mathematical detail, follow the endnote.143
Suppose the data are 100 x values and 100 y values sampled from Normal(0, 1) and that
the model is:
xi ∼Normal(µx, 1)
yi ∼Normal(µy, 1)
µx ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
µy ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
What HMC needs to drive are two functions and two settings. The first function computes
the log-probability of the data and parameters. This is just the top part of Bayes formula,
and every MCMC strategy requires this. It tells the algorithm the “elevation” of any set of
parameter values. For the model above, it is just:
X
i
log p(yi|µy, 1) +
X
i
log p(xi|µx, 1) + log p(µy|0, 0.5) + log p(µx, 0, 0.5)
where p(x|a, b) here means the Gaussian density of x at mean a and standard deviation b. The
second thing HMC needs is the gradient, which just means the slope in all directions at
the current position. In this case, that means just two derivatives. If you take the expression
above and differentiate it with respect to µx and then µy, you have what you need. I’ve placed
these derivatives, in code form, in the Overthinking box further down, where you’ll find a
complete R implementation of this example.
The two settings that HMC needs are a choice of number of leapfrog steps and a
choice of step size for each. This part is strange. And usually your machine will pick these
values for you. But having some idea of them will be useful for understanding some of the
newer features of HMC algorithms. Each path in the simulation—each curve for example
