276
9. MARKOV CHAIN MONTE CARLO
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Radial distance from mode
Density
1
10
100
1000
Figure 9.4. Concentration of measure and the curse of high dimensions.
The horizontal axis shows radial distance from the mode in parameter
space. Each density is a random sample of 1000 points. The number above
each density is the number of dimensions. As the number of parameters
increases, the mode is further away from the values we want to sample.
Rd <- sapply( 1:T , function(i) rad_dist( Y[i,] ) )
dens( Rd )
I display this density, as well as the corresponding densities for distributions with 1, 100, and
1000 dimensions, in Figure 9.4. The horizontal axis here is radial distance of the point from
the mode. So the value 0 is the peak of probability. You can see that an ordinary Gaussian
distribution with only 1 dimension, on the left, samples most of its points right next to this
peak, as you’d expect. But with 10 dimensions, already there are no samples next to the
peak at zero. With 100 dimensions, we’ve moved very far from the peak. And with 1000
dimensions, even further. The sampled points are in a thin, high-dimensional shell very far
from the mode. Inside this shell, pairs of parameters curve dramatically against one another,
creating very hard paths for a sampler to follow.
This is why we need MCMC algorithms other than Metropolis and Gibbs that focus on
the entire posterior at once, instead of one or a few dimensions at a time. Otherwise we get
stuck in a narrow, highly curving region of parameter space.
9.3. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
It appears to be a quite general principle that, whenever there is a random-
ized way of doing something, then there is a nonrandomized way that deliv-
ers better performance but requires more thought. —E. T. Jaynes142
The Metropolis algorithm and Gibbs sampling are highly random procedures. They try
out new parameter values—proposals—and see how good they are, compared to the cur-
rent values. Gibbs sampling gains efficiency by reducing the randomness of proposals by
exploiting knowledge of the target distribution. This seems to fit Jaynes’ suggestion, quoted
above, that when there is a random way of accomplishing some calculation, there is probably
a less random way that is better. This less random way may require a lot more thought. The
Gibbs strategy has limitations, but it gets its improvement over plain Metropolis by being
less random, not more.
