7.3. GOLEM TAMING: REGULARIZATION
219
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
parameter value
Density
Figure 7.7. Regularizing priors, weak and
strong. Three Gaussian priors of varying stan-
dard deviation. These priors reduce overfit-
ting, but with different strength.
Dashed:
Normal(0, 1).
Thin solid: Normal(0, 0.5).
Thick solid: Normal(0, 0.2).
Assume, as is good practice, that the predictor x is standardized so that its standard deviation
is 1 and its mean is zero. Then the prior on α is a nearly flat prior that has no practical effect
on inference, as you’ve seen in earlier chapters.
But the prior on β is narrower and is meant to regularize. The prior β ∼Normal(0, 1)
says that, before seeing the data, the machine should be very skeptical of values above 2 and
below −2, as a Gaussian prior with a standard deviation of 1 assigns only 5% plausibility to
values above and below 2 standard deviations. Because the predictor variable x is standard-
ized, you can interpret this as meaning that a change of 1 standard deviation in x is very
unlikely to produce 2 units of change in the outcome.
You can visualize this prior in Figure 7.7 as the dashed curve. Since more probability
is massed up around zero, estimates are shrunk towards zero—they are conservative. The
other curves are narrower priors that are even more skeptical of parameter values far from
zero. The thin solid curve is a stronger Gaussian prior with a standard deviation of 0.5. The
thick solid curve is even stronger, with a standard deviation of only 0.2.
How strong or weak these skeptical priors will be in practice depends upon the data
and model. So let’s explore a train-test example, similar to what you saw in the previous
section (Figure 7.6). This time we’ll use the regularizing priors pictured in Figure 7.7,
instead of flat priors. For each of five different models, we simulate 10,000 times for each of
the three regularizing priors above. Figure 7.8 shows the results. The points are the same
flat-prior deviances as in the previous section: blue for training deviance and black for test
deviance. The lines show the train and test deviances for the different priors. The blue lines
are training deviance and the black lines test deviance. The style of the lines correspond to
those in Figure 7.7.
Focus on the left-hand plot, where the sample size is N = 20, for the moment. The
training deviance always increases—gets worse—with tighter priors. The thick blue trend is
substantially larger than the others, and this is because the skeptical prior prevents the model
from adapting completely to the sample. But the test deviances, out-of-sample, improve (get
smaller) with the tighter priors. The model with three parameters is still the best model
out-of-sample, and the regularizing priors have little impact on its deviance.
But also notice that as the prior gets more skeptical, the harm done by an overly complex
model is greatly reduced. For the Normal(0, 0.2) prior (thick line), the models with 4 and 5
