8.1. BUILDING AN INTERACTION
245
the data into two data frames, one for Africa and one for all the other continents. But it’s not
a good idea to split the data in this way. Here are four reasons.
First, there are usually some parameters, such as σ, that the model says do not depend
in any way upon continent. By splitting the data table, you are hurting the accuracy of the es-
timates for these parameters, because you are essentially making two less-accurate estimates
instead of pooling all of the evidence into one estimate. In effect, you have accidentally as-
sumed that variance differs between African and non-African nations. Now, there’s nothing
wrong with that sort of assumption. But you want to avoid accidental assumptions.
Second, in order to acquire probability statements about the variable you used to split
the data, cont_africa in this case, you need to include it in the model. Otherwise, you
have only the weakest sort of statistical argument. Isn’t there uncertainty about the predictive
value of distinguishing between African and non-African nations? Of course there is. Unless
you analyze all of the data in a single model, you can’t easily quantify that uncertainty. If you
just let the posterior distribution do the work for you, you’ll have a useful measure of that
uncertainty.
Third, we may want to use information criteria or another method to compare models.
In order to compare a model that treats all continents the same way to a model that allows
different slopes in different continents, we need models that use all of the same data (as
explained in Chapter 7). This means we can’t split the data, but have to make the model split
the data.
Fourth, once you begin using multilevel models (Chapter 13), you’ll see that there are
advantages to borrowing information across categories like “Africa” and “not Africa.” This is
especially true when sample sizes vary across categories, such that overfitting risk is higher
within some categories. In other words, what we learn about ruggedness outside of Africa
should have some effect on our estimate within Africa, and visa versa. Multilevel models
(Chapter 13) borrow information in this way, in order to improve estimates in all categories.
When we split the data, this borrowing is impossible.
Overthinking: Not so simple causation. The terrain ruggedness DAG in the preceding section is
simple. But the truth isn’t so simple. Continent isn’t really the cause of interest. Rather there are
hypothetical historical exposures to colonialism and the slave trade that have persistent influences
on economic performance. Terrain features, like ruggedness, that causally reduced those historical
factors may indirectly influence economy. Like this:
C
G
H
R
U
H stands for historical factors like exposure to slave trade. The total causal influence of R contains
both a direct path R →G (this is presumably always negative) and an indirect path R →H →G. The
second path is the one that covaries with continent C, because H is strongly associated with C. Note
that the confounds U could influence any of these variables (except for C). If for example distance to
coast is really what influenced H in the past, not terrain ruggedness, then the association of terrain
ruggedness with GDP is non-causal. The data contain a large number of potential confounds that
