6.4. CONFRONTING CONFOUNDING
191
U [unobserved]
X -> Y
X <- U <- A -> C -> Y
U -> B <- C
}")
adjustmentSets( dag_6.1 , exposure="X" , outcome="Y" )
{ C }
{ A }
Conditioning on either C or A would suffice. Conditioning on C is the better idea, from
the perspective of efficiency, since it could also help with the precision of the estimate of
X →Y. Notice that conditioning on U would also work. But since we told dagitty that U
is unobserved (see the code above), it didn’t suggest it in the adjustment sets.
Now consider the second path, passing through B. This path does containa collider, U →
B ←C. It is therefore already closed. It is not a backdoor, and that is why adjustmentSets
above did not mention B. You don’t need to control for B. But if we do condition on B, it is not
harmless. It will open the path, creating a confound. Then our inference about X →Y will
change, but without the DAG, we won’t know whether that change is helping us or rather
misleading us. The fact that including a variable changes the X →Y coefficient does not
always mean that the coefficient is better now. You could have just conditioned on a collider.
6.4.3. Backdoor waffles. As a final example, let’s return to the Waffle House and divorce rate
correlation from the introduction to Chapter 5. We’ll make a DAG, use it to find a minimal
set of covariates, and use it as well to derive the testable implications of the DAG. This is
important, because sometimes you really can test whether your DAG is consistent with the
evidence. The data alone can never tell us when a DAG is right. But the data can tell us when
a DAG is wrong.
We’re interested in the total causal effect of the number of Waffle Houses on divorce rate
in each State. Presumably, the naive correlation between these two variables is spurious.
What is the minimal adjustment set that will block backdoor paths from Waffle House to
divorce? Let’s make a graph:
A
D
M
S
W
In this graph, S is whether or not a State is in the southern United States, A is median age
at marriage, M is marriage rate, W is number of Waffle Houses, and D is divorce rate. This
graph assumes that southern States have lower ages of marriage (S →A), higher rates of
marriage both directly (S →M) and mediated through age of marriage (S →A →M), as
well as more waffles (S →W). Age of marriage and marriage rate both influence divorce.
There are three open backdoor paths between W and D. Just trace backwards, starting
at W and ending up at D. But notice that all of them pass first through S. So we can close
