238
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
in the thick tail of war casualties.126 A reasonable estimate depends upon either a longer
time series or judicious use of a thick tailed distribution.
Let’s re-estimate the divorce model using a Student-t distribution with ν = 2. All that’s
really needed is to replace dnorm with dstudent:
R code
7.35
m5.3t <- quap(
alist(
D ~ dstudent( 2 , mu , sigma ) ,
mu <- a + bM*M + bA*A ,
a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
bM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
bA ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
) , data = d )
When you compute PSIS now, PSIS(m5.3t), you won’t get any warnings about Pareto k
values. The relative influence of Idaho has been much reduced. How does this impact the
posterior distribution of the association between age at marriage and divorce? If you com-
pare models m5.3t and m5.3, you’ll see that the coefficient bA has gotten farther from zero
when we introduce the Student-t distribution. This is because Idaho has a low divorce rate
and a low median age at marriage. When it was influential, it reduced the association be-
tween age at marriage and divorce. Now it is less influential, so the association is estimate to
be slightly larger. But the consequence of using robust regression is not always to increase
an association. It depends upon the details.
Rethinking: The Curse of Tippecanoe. One concern with model comparison is, if we try enough
combinations and transformations of predictor variables, we might eventually find a model that fits
any particular sample very well. But this fit will be a peculiar case of overfitting, unlikely to generalize
to new data. And WAIC and similar metrics will be fooled. So it’s common to advise against trying
every possible model.
Consider by analogy the Curse of Tippecanoe.127 From the year 1840 until 1960, every United
States president who was elected in a year ending in the digit 0 (which happens every 20 years, given
4 year terms) has died in office. William Henry Harrison was the first, being elected in 1840 and dying
of pneumonia the next year. John F. Kennedy was the last, elected in 1960 and assassinated in 1963.
Seven American presidents died in sequence in this pattern. Ronald Reagan was elected in 1980, but
despite at least one attempt on his life, he managed to live long after his term was up, breaking the
curse. Given enough time and data, a pattern like this can be found for almost any body of data.
But without any compelling reason to believe this pattern is meaningful, it is hardly compelling that
such patterns exist. Most large sets of data will contain patterns of correlation that are strong and
surprising. If we search hard enough, we are bound to find a Curse of Tippecanoe.
Fiddling with and constructing many predictor variables is a great way to find coincidences, but
not necessarily a great way to evaluate hypotheses. However, fitting many possible models isn’t always
a dangerous idea, provided some judgment is exercised in weeding down the list of variables at the
start. There are two scenarios in which this strategy appears defensible. First, sometimes all one wants
to do is explore a set of data, because there are no clear hypotheses to evaluate. This is rightly labeled
pejoratively as data dredging, when one does not admit to it. But when used together with model
averaging, and freely admitted, it can be a way to stimulate future investigation. Second, sometimes
we need to convince an audience that we have tried all of the combinations of predictors, because
none of the variables seem to help much in prediction.
