270
9. MARKOV CHAIN MONTE CARLO
Figure 9.1. Good King Markov’s island king-
dom. Each of the 10 islands has a population
proportional to its number, 1 through 10. The
King’s goal is to visit each island, in the long
run, in proportion to its population size. This
can be accomplished by the Metropolis algo-
rithm.
Rethinking: Stan was a man. The Stan programming language is not an abbreviation or acronym.
Rather, it is named after Stanislaw Ulam (1909–1984). Ulam is credited as one of the inventors of
Markov chain Monte Carlo. Together with Ed Teller, Ulam applied it to designing fusion bombs. But
he and others soon applied the general Monte Carlo method to diverse problems of less monstrous
nature. Ulam made important contributions in pure mathematics, chaos theory, and molecular and
theoretical biology, as well.
9.1. Good King Markov and His island kingdom
For the moment, forget about posterior densities and MCMC. Consider instead the tale
of Good King Markov.138 King Markov was a benevolent autocrat of an island kingdom,
a circular archipelago, with 10 islands. Each island was neighbored by two others, and the
entire archipelago formed a ring. The islands were of different sizes, and so had different
sized populations living on them. The second island was about twice as populous as the first,
the third about three times as populous as the first, and so on, up to the largest island, which
was 10 times as populous as the smallest. The good king’s island kingdom is displayed in
Figure 9.1, with the islands numbered by their relative population sizes.
The Good King was an autocrat, but he did have a number of obligations to His people.
Among these obligations, King Markov agreed to visit each island in His kingdom from time
to time. Since the people love their king, each island would prefer that he visit them more
often. And so everyone agreed that the king should visit each island in proportion to its
population size, visiting the largest island 10 times as often as the smallest, for example.
The Good King Markov, however, wasn’t one for schedules or bookkeeping, and so he
wanted a way to fulfill his obligation without planning his travels months ahead of time. Also,
since the archipelago was a ring, the King insisted that he only move among adjacent islands,
to minimize time spent on the water—like many citizens of his kingdom, the king believes
there are sea monsters in the middle of the archipelago.
The king’s advisor, a Mr Metropolis, engineered a clever solution to these demands. We’ll
call this solution the Metropolis algorithm. Here’s how it works.
(1) Wherever the King is, each week he decides between staying put for another week
or moving to one of the two adjacent islands. To decide his next move, he flips a
coin.
