230
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
are large and sometimes they are small. Just as relative posterior probability provides ad-
vice about how confident we might be about parameters (conditional on the model), relative
model accuracy provides advice about how confident we might be about models (conditional
on the set of models compared).
Another reason to never select models based upon WAIC/CV/PSIS alone is that we
might care about causal inference. Maximizing expected predictive accuracy is not the same
as inferring causation. Highly confounded models can still make good predictions, at least
in the short term. They won’t tell us the consequences of an intervention, but they might
help us forecast. So we need to be clear about our goals and not just toss variables into the
causal salad and let WAIC select our meal.
So what good are these criteria then? They measure expected predictive value of a vari-
able on the right scale, accounting for overfitting. They also provide a way to measure the
overfitting tendency of a model, and that helps us both design models and understand how
statistical inference works. Finally, minimizing a criterion like WAIC can help in designing
models, especially in tuning parameters in multilevel models.
So instead of model selection, we’ll focus on model comparison. This is a more general
approach that uses multiple models to understand both how different variables influence pre-
dictions and, in combination with a causal model, implied conditional indendencies among
variables help us infer causal relationships.
We’ll work through two examples. The first emphasizes the distinction between compar-
ing models for predictive performance versus comparing them in order to infer causation.
The second emphasizes the pointwise nature of model comparison and what inspecting in-
dividual points can reveal about model performance and mis-specification. This second ex-
ample also introduces a more robust alternative to Gaussian regression.
7.5.1. Model mis-selection. We must keep in mind the lessons of the previous chapters: In-
ferring cause and making predictions are different tasks. Cross-validation and WAIC aim
to find models that make good predictions. They don’t solve any causal inference problem.
If you select a model based only on expected predictive accuracy, you could easily be con-
founded. The reason is that backdoor paths do give us valid information about statistical
associations in the data. So they can improve prediction, as long as we don’t intervene in the
system and the future is like the past. But recall that our working definition of knowing a
cause is that we can predict the consequences of an intervention. So a good PSIS or WAIC
score does not in general indicate a good causal model.
For example, recall the plant growth example from the previous chapter. The model that
conditions on fungus will make better predictions than the model that omits it. If you return
to that section (page 175) and run models m6.6, m6.7, and m6.8 again, we can compare their
WAIC values. To remind you, m6.6 is the model with just an intercept, m6.7 is the model
that include both treatment and fungus (the post-treatment variable), and m6.8 is the model
that includes treatment but omits fungus. It’s m6.8 that allows us to correctly infer the causal
influence of treatment.
To begin, let’s use the WAIC convenience function to calculate WAIC for m6.7:
R code
7.25
set.seed(11)
WAIC( m6.7 )
[1] 361.4511
attr(,"lppd")
