7.2. ENTROPY AND ACCURACY
209
each day. So when either weatherperson provides a prediction that differs from the target,
we can measure the distance of the prediction from the target. But what kind of distance
should we adopt? It’s not obvious how to go about answering this question. But there turns
out to be a unique and optimal answer.
Getting to the answer depends upon appreciating what an accuracy metric needs to do.
It should appreciate that some targets are just easier to hit than other targets. For example,
suppose we extend the weather forecast into the winter. Now there are three types of days:
rain, sun, and snow. Now there are three ways to be wrong, instead of just two. This has to be
reflected in any reasonable measure of distance from the target, because by adding another
type of event, the target has gotten harder to hit.
It’s like taking a two-dimensional archery bullseye and forcing the archer to hit the tar-
get at the right time—a third dimension—as well. Now the possible distance between the
best archer and the worst archer has grown, because there’s another way to miss. And with
another way to miss, one might also say that there is another way for an archer to impress.
As the potential distance between the target and the shot increases, so too does the potential
improvement and ability of a talented archer to impress us.
The solution to the problem of how to measure distance of a model’s accuracy from a
target was provided in the late 1940s.102 Originally applied to problems in communication
of messages, such as telegraph, the field of information theory is now important across
the basic and applied sciences, and it has deep connections to Bayesian inference. And like
many successful fields, information theory has spawned many bogus applications, as well.103
The basic insight is to ask: How much is our uncertainty reduced by learning an outcome?
Consider the weather forecasts again. Forecasts are issued in advance and the weather is
uncertain. When the actual day arrives, the weather is no longer uncertain. The reduction
in uncertainty is then a natural measure of how much we have learned, how much “infor-
mation” we derive from observing the outcome. So if we can develop a precise definition of
“uncertainty,” we can provide a baseline measure of how hard it is to predict, as well as how
much improvement is possible. The measured decrease in uncertainty is the definition of
information in this context.
Information: The reduction in uncertainty when we learn an outcome.
To use this definition, what we need is a principled way to quantify the uncertainty in-
herent in a probability distribution. So suppose again that there are two possible weather
events on any particular day: Either it is sunny or it is rainy. Each of these events occurs
with some probability, and these probabilities add up to one. What we want is a function
that uses the probabilities of shine and rain and produces a measure of uncertainty.
There are many possible ways to measure uncertainty. The most common way begins
by naming some properties a measure of uncertainty should possess. These are the three
intuitive desiderata:
(1) The measure of uncertainty should be continuous. If it were not, then an arbitrarily
small change in any of the probabilities, for example the probability of rain, would
result in a massive change in uncertainty.
(2) The measure of uncertainty should increase as the number of possible events in-
creases. For example, suppose there are two cities that need weather forecasts. In
the first city, it rains on half of the days in the year and is sunny on the others. In
the second, it rains, shines, and hails, each on 1 out of every 3 days in the year. We’d
