8.5. PRACTICE
265
considered were among the most complicated so far in the book. To go any further, we’re
going to need a more capable conditioning engine to fit our models to data. That’s the topic
of the next chapter.
8.5. Practice
Easy.
8E1. For each of the causal relationships below, name a hypothetical third variable that would lead
to an interaction effect.
(1) Bread dough rises because of yeast.
(2) Education leads to higher income.
(3) Gasoline makes a car go.
8E2. Which of the following explanations invokes an interaction?
(1) Caramelizing onions requires cooking over low heat and making sure the onions do not
dry out.
(2) A car will go faster when it has more cylinders or when it has a better fuel injector.
(3) Most people acquire their political beliefs from their parents, unless they get them instead
from their friends.
(4) Intelligent animal species tend to be either highly social or have manipulative appendages
(hands, tentacles, etc.).
8E3. For each of the explanations in 8E2, write a linear model that expresses the stated relationship.
Medium.
8M1. Recall the tulips example from the chapter. Suppose another set of treatments adjusted the
temperature in the greenhouse over two levels: cold and hot. The data in the chapter were collected
at the cold temperature. You find none of the plants grown under the hot temperature developed
any blooms at all, regardless of the water and shade levels. Can you explain this result in terms of
interactions between water, shade, and temperature?
8M2. Can you invent a regression equation that would make the bloom size zero, whenever the
temperature is hot?
8M3. In parts of North America, ravens depend upon wolves for their food. This is because ravens
are carnivorous but cannot usually kill or open carcasses of prey. Wolves however can and do kill
and tear open animals, and they tolerate ravens co-feeding at their kills. This species relationship
is generally described as a “species interaction.” Can you invent a hypothetical set of data on raven
population size in which this relationship would manifest as a statistical interaction? Do you think
the biological interaction could be linear? Why or why not?
Hard.
8H1. Return to the data(tulips) example in the chapter. Now include the bed variable as a pre-
dictor in the interaction model. Don’t interact bed with the other predictors; just include it as a main
effect. Note that bed is categorical. So to use it properly, you will need to either construct dummy
variables or rather an index variable, as explained in Chapter 6.
8H2. Use WAIC to compare the model from 8H1 to a model that omits bed. What do you infer
from this comparison? Can you reconcile the WAIC results with the posterior distribution of the bed
coefficients?
