190
6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR
D will also control, to a lesser extent, for Z. The reason is that D has some informa-
tion about Z. This will (partially) open the path from X to Y, because Z is a collider.
The same holds for non-colliders. If you condition on a descendent of Z in the pipe,
it’ll still be like (weakly) closing the pipe.
No matter how complicated a causal DAG appears, it is always built out of these four
types of relations. And since you know how to open and close each, you (or your computer)
can figure out which variables you need to control—or not—in order to shut the backdoor.
Here’s the recipe:
(1) List all of the paths connecting X (the potential cause of interest) and Y (the out-
come).
(2) Classify each path by whether it is open or closed. A path is open unless it contains
a collider.
(3) Classify each path by whether it is a backdoor path. A backdoor path has an arrow
entering X.
(4) If there are any backdoor paths that are also open, decide which variable(s) to con-
dition on to close it.
Let’s consider some examples.
6.4.2. Two roads. The DAG below contains an exposure of interest X, an outcome of interest
Y, an unobserved variable U, and three observed covariates (A, B, and C).
A
B
C
U
X
Y
We are interested in the blue path, the causal effect of X on Y. Which of the observed covari-
ates do we need to add to the model, in order to correctly infer it? To figure this out, look
for backdoor paths. Aside from the direct path, there are two paths from X to Y:
(1) X ←U ←A →C →Y
(2) X ←U →B ←C →Y
These are both backdoor paths that could confound inference. Now ask which of these paths
is open. If a backdoor path is open, then we must close it. If a backdoor path is closed already,
then we must not accidentally open it and create a confound.
Consider the first path, passing through A. This path is open, because there is no collider
within it. There is just a fork at the top and two pipes, one on each side. Information will
flow through this path, confounding X →Y. It is a backdoor. To shut this backdoor, we
need to condition on one of its variables. We can’t condition on U, since it is unobserved.
That leaves A or C. Either will shut the backdoor. You can ask your computer to reproduce
this analysis, to analyze the graph and find the necessary variables to control for in order to
block the backdoor. The dagitty R package provides adjustmentSets for this purpose:
R code
6.29
library(dagitty)
dag_6.1 <- dagitty( "dag {
