258
8. CONDITIONAL MANATEES
to see how water will help a plant—photosynthesis depends upon both light and water. Like-
wise, in the absence of water, sunlight does a plant little good. One way to model such an
interdependency is to use an interaction effect. In the absence of a good mechanistic model
of the interaction, one that uses a theory about the plant’s physiology to hypothesize the
functional relationship between light and water, then a simple linear two-way interaction is
a good start. But ultimately it’s not close to the best that we could do.
8.3.2. The models. I’m going to focus on just two models: (1) the model with both water
and shade but no interaction and (2) the model that also contains the interaction of water
with shade. You could also inspect models that contain only one of these variables, water
or shade, and I encourage the reader to try that at the end and make sure you understand
the full ensemble of models.
The causal scenario is simply that water (W) and shade (S) both influence blooms (B):
W →B ←S. As before, this DAG doesn’t tell us the function through which W and S jointly
influence B, B = f(W, S). In principle, every unique combination of W and S could have a
different mean S. The convention is to do something much simpler. We’ll start simple.
The first model, containing no interaction at all (only “main effects”), begins this way:
Bi ∼Normal(µi, σ)
µi = α + βW(Wi −¯W) + βS(Si −¯S)
where Bi is the value of blooms on row i, Wi is the value of water, and Si is the value of
shade. The symbols ¯W and ¯S are the means of water and shade, respectively. All together,
this is just a linear regression with two predictors, each centered by subtracting its mean.
To make estimation easier, let’s center W and S and scale B by its maximum:
R code
8.20
d$blooms_std <- d$blooms / max(d$blooms)
d$water_cent <- d$water - mean(d$water)
d$shade_cent <- d$shade - mean(d$shade)
Now blooms_std ranges from 0 to 1, and both water_cent and shade_cent range from
−1 to 1. I’ve scaled blooms by its maximum observed value, for three reasons. First, the
large values on the raw scale will make optimization difficult. Second, it will be easier to
assign a reasonable prior this way. Third, we don’t want to standardize blooms, because zero
is a meaningful boundary we want to preserve.
As always in rescaling variables, the goals are to create focal points that you might have
prior information about, prior to seeing the actual data values. That way we can assign priors
that are not obviously crazy, and in thinking about those priors, we might realize that the
model makes no sense. But this is only possible if we think about the relationship between
measurements and parameters, and the exercise of rescaling and assigning sensible priors
helps us along that path. Even when there are enough data that choice of priors is not crucial,
this thought exercise is useful.
There are three parameters (aside from σ) in this model, so we need three priors. As a
first, vague guess:
α ∼Normal(0.5, 1)
βW ∼Normal(0, 1)
βS ∼Normal(0, 1)
