9.2. METROPOLIS ALGORITHMS
273
didn’t know how many islands were in it. All he needs to know at any point in time is the
population of the current island and the population of the proposal island. Then, without any
forward planning or backwards record keeping, King Markov can satisfy his royal obligation
to visit his people proportionally.
9.2. Metropolis Algorithms
The precise algorithm King Markov used is a special case of the general Metropolis
algorithm from the real world.139 And this algorithm is an example of Markov chain
Monte Carlo. In real applications, the goal is of course not to help an autocrat schedule
his journeys, but instead to draw samples from an unknown and usually complex target
distribution, like a posterior probability distribution.
• The “islands” in our objective are parameter values, and they need not be discrete,
but can instead take on a continuous range of values as usual.
• The “population sizes” in our objective are the posterior probabilities at each pa-
rameter value.
• The “weeks” in our objective are samples taken from the joint posterior of the pa-
rameters in the model.
Provided the way we choose our proposed parameter values at each step is symmetric—so
that there is an equal chance of proposing from A to B and from B to A—then the Metropolis
algorithm will eventually give us a collection of samples from the joint posterior. We can then
use these samples just like all the samples you’ve already used in this book.
The Metropolis algorithm is the grandparent of several different strategies for getting
samples from unknown posterior distributions. In the remainder of this section, I briefly
explain the concept behind Gibbs sampling. Gibbs sampling is much better than plain Me-
tropolis, and it continues to be common in applied Bayesian statistics. But it is rapidly being
replaced by other algorithms.
9.2.1. Gibbssampling. The Metropolis algorithm works wheneverthe probability ofpropos-
ing a jump to B from A is equal to the probability of proposing A from B, when the pro-
posal distribution is symmetric. There is a more general method, known as Metropolis-
Hastings,140 that allows asymmetric proposals. This would mean, in the context of King
Markov’s fable, that the King’s coin were biased to lead him clockwise on average.
Why would we want an algorithm that allows asymmetric proposals? One reason is that
it makes it easier to handle parameters, like standard deviations, that have boundaries at
zero. A better reason, however, is that it allows us to generate savvy proposals that explore
the posterior distribution more efficiently. By “more efficiently,” I mean that we can acquire
an equally good image of the posterior distribution in fewer steps.
The most common way to generate savvy proposals is a technique known as Gibbs sam-
pling.141 Gibbs sampling is a variant of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm that uses clever
proposals and is therefore more efficient. By “efficient,” I mean that you can get a good
estimate of the posterior from Gibbs sampling with many fewer samples than a comparable
Metropolis approach. The improvement arises from adaptive proposals in which the distribu-
tion of proposed parameter values adjusts itself intelligently, depending upon the parameter
values at the moment.
How Gibbs sampling computes these adaptive proposals depends upon using particu-
lar combinations of prior distributions and likelihoods known as conjugate pairs. Conjugate
pairs have analytical solutions for the posterior distribution of an individual parameter. And
