7.4. PREDICTING PREDICTIVE ACCURACY
223
If you look back at Figure 7.8, there is a curious pattern in the distance between the
points (showing the train-test pairs with flat priors): The difference is approximately twice
the number of parameters in each model. The difference between training deviance and
testing deviance is almost exactly 2 for the first model (with 1 parameter) and about 10 for
the last (with 5 parameters). This is not a coincidence but rather one of the coolest results in
machine learning: For ordinary linear regressions with flat priors, the expected overfitting
penalty is about twice the number of parameters.
This is the phenomenon behind information criteria. The best known information
criterion is the Akaike information criterion, abbreviated AIC.112 AIC provides a sur-
prisingly simple estimate of the average out-of-sample deviance:
AIC = Dtrain + 2p = −2lppd + 2p
where p is the number of free parameters in the posterior distribution. As the 2 is just there
for scaling, what AIC tells us is that the dimensionality of the posterior distribution is a
natural measure of the model’s overfitting tendency. More complex models tend to overfit
more, directly in proportion to the number of parameters.
AIC is of mainly historical interest now. Newer and more general approximations exist
that dominate AIC is every context. But Akaike deserves tremendous credit for the initial
inspiration. See the box further down for more details. AIC is an approximation that is
reliable only when:
(1) The priors are flat or overwhelmed by the likelihood.
(2) The posterior distribution is approximately multivariate Gaussian.
(3) The sample size N is much greater113 than the number of parameters k.
Since flat priors are hardly ever the best priors, we’ll want something more general. And
when you get to multilevel models, the priors are never flat by definition. There is a slightly
more general criterion called the Deviance Information Criterion (DIC). DIC is okay
with informative priors, but still assumes that the posterior is multivariate Gaussian and that
N ≫k.114
We’ll focus on a criterion that is more general than both AIC and DIC. The Widely Ap-
plicable Information Criterion (WAIC) makes no assumption about the shape of the
posterior.115 It provides an approximation of the out-of-sample deviance that converges to
the cross-validation approximation in a large sample. But in a finite sample, it can disagree.
It can disagree because it has a different target—it isn’t trying to approximate the cross-
validation score, but rather guess the out-of-sample K-L Divergence. In the large-sample
limit, these tend to be the same.
Overthinking: The Akaike inspiration criterion. The Akaike Information Criterion is a truly elegant
result. Hirotugu Akaike (赤池弘次, 1927–2009) explained how the insight came to him: “On the
morning of March 16, 1971, while taking a seat in a commuter train, I suddenly realized that the
parameters of the factor analysis model were estimated by maximizing the likelihood and that the
mean value of the logarithmus of the likelihood was connected with the Kullback-Leibler information
number.”116 What was at the heart of his realization? Mechanically, deriving AIC means writing down
the goal, which is the expected K-L divergence, and then making approximations. The expected bias
turns out to be proportional to the number of parameters, provided a number of assumptions are
approximately correct.
