7.1. THE PROBLEM WITH PARAMETERS
197
In order to introduce information criteria, this chapter must also introduce informa-
tion theory. If this is your first encounter with information theory, it’ll probably seem
strange. But some understanding of it needed. Once you start using information criteria—
this chapter describes AIC, DIC, WAIC, and PSIS-LOO—you’ll find that implementing them
is much easier than understanding them. This is their curse. So most of this chapter aims to
fight the curse, focusing on their conceptual foundations, with applications to follow.
It’s worth noting, before getting started, that this material is hard. If you find yourself
confused at any point, you are normal. Any sense of confusion you feel is just your brain cor-
rectly calibrating to the subject matter. Over time, confusion is replaced by comprehension
for how overfitting, regularization, and information criteria behave in familiar contexts.
Rethinking: Stargazing. The most common form of model selection among practicing scientists is
to search for a model in which every coefficient is statistically significant. Statisticians sometimes call
this stargazing, as it is embodied by scanning for asterisks (**) trailing after estimates. A colleague
of mine once called this approach the “Space Odyssey,” in honor of A. C. Clarke’s novel and film. The
model that is full of stars, the thinking goes, is best.
But such a model is not best. Whatever you think about null hypothesis significance testing in
general, using it to select among structurally different models is a mistake—p-values are not designed
to help you navigate between underfitting and overfitting. As you’ll see once you start using AIC and
related measures, predictor variables that improve prediction are not always statistically significant. It
is also possible for variables that are statistically significant to do nothing useful for prediction. Since
the conventional 5% threshold is purely conventional, we shouldn’t expect it to optimize anything.
Rethinking: Is AIC Bayesian? AIC is not usually thought of as a Bayesian tool. There are both his-
torical and statistical reasons for this. Historically, AIC was originally derived without reference to
Bayesian probability. Statistically, AIC uses MAP estimates instead of the entire posterior, and it re-
quires flat priors. So it doesn’t look particularly Bayesian. Reinforcing this impression is the existence
of another model comparison metric, the Bayesian information criterion (BIC). However, BIC
also requires flat priors and MAP estimates, although it’s not actually an “information criterion.”
Regardless, AIC has a clear and pragmatic interpretation under Bayesian probability, and Akaike
and others have long argued for alternative Bayesian justifications of the procedure.95 And as you’ll
see later in the book, more obviously Bayesian information criteria like WAIC provide almost exactly
the same results as AIC, when AIC’s assumptions are met. In this light, we can fairly regard AIC as
a special limit of a Bayesian criterion like WAIC, even if that isn’t how AIC was originally derived.
All of this is an example of a common feature of statistical procedures: The same procedure can be
derived and justified from multiple, sometimes philosophically incompatible, perspectives.
7.1. The problem with parameters
In the previous chapters, we saw how adding variables and parameters to a model can
help to reveal hidden effects and improve estimates. You also saw that adding variables can
hurt, in particular when we lack a trusted causal model. Colliders are real. But sometimes we
don’t care about causal inference. Maybe we just want to make good predictions. Consider
for example the grandparent-parent-child example from the previous chapter. Just adding
all the variables to the model will give us a good predictive model in that case. That we don’t
understand what is going on is irrelevant. So is just adding everything to the model okay?
The answer is “no.” There are two related problems with just adding variables. The first
is that adding parameters—making the model more complex—nearly always improves the
