8.3. CONTINUOUS INTERACTIONS
257
Africa’s unusually positive relationship with terrain ruggedness is due to historical causes,
not contemporary terrain, then tunnels might improve economies in the present. At the
same time, continent is not really a cause of economic activity. Rather there are historical
and political factors associated with continents, and we use the continent variable as a proxy
for those factors. It is manipulation of those other factors that would matter.
8.3. Continuous interactions
I want to convince the reader that interaction effects are difficult to interpret. They are
nearly impossible to interpret, using only posterior means and standard deviations. Once
interactions exist, multiple parameters are always in play at the same time. It is hard enough
with the simple, categorical interactions from the terrain ruggedness example. Once we start
modeling interactions among more than one continuous variables, it gets much harder. It’s
one thing to make a slope conditional upon a category. In such a context, the model reduces
to estimating a different slope for each category. But it’s quite a lot harder to understand that
a slope varies in a continuous fashion with a continuous variable. Interpretation is much
harder in this case, even though the mathematics of the model are essentially the same as in
the categorical case.
In pursuit of clarifying the construction and interpretation of continuous interac-
tions among two or more continuous predictor variables, in this section I develop a simple
regression example and show you a way to plot the two-way interaction between two contin-
uous variables. The method I present for plotting this interaction is a triptych plot, a panel of
three complementary figures that comprise a whole picture of the regression results. There’s
nothing magic about having three figures—in other cases you might want more or less. In-
stead, the utility lies in making multiple figures that allow one to see how the interaction
alters a slope, across changes in a chosen variable.
8.3.1. A winter flower. The data in this example are sizes of blooms from beds of tulips
grown in greenhouses, under different soil and light conditions.135 Load the data with:
R code
8.19
library(rethinking)
data(tulips)
d <- tulips
str(d)
'data.frame': 27 obs. of
4 variables:
$ bed
: Factor w/ 3 levels "a","b","c": 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 ...
$ water : int
1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 1 ...
$ shade : int
1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 ...
$ blooms: num
0 0 111 183.5 59.2 ...
The blooms column will be our outcome—what we wish to predict. The water and shade
columns will be our predictor variables. water indicates one of three ordered levels of soil
moisture, from low (1) to high (3). shade indicates one of three ordered levels of light ex-
posure, from high (1) to low (3). The last column, bed, indicates a cluster of plants from the
same section of the greenhouse.
Since both light and water help plants grow and produce blooms, it stands to reason that
the independent effect of each will be to produce bigger blooms. But we’ll also be interested
in the interaction between these two variables. In the absence of light, for example, it’s hard
