256
8. CONDITIONAL MANATEES
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
ruggedness
expected difference log GDP
Africa higher GDP
Africa lower GDP
Figure 8.6. The other side of the interaction
between ruggedness and continent. The ver-
tical axis is the difference in expected propor-
tional log GDP for a nation in Africa and one
outside Africa. At low ruggedness, we expect
“moving” a nation to Africa to hurt its econ-
omy. But at high ruggedness, the opposite is
true. The association between continent and
economy depends upon ruggedness, just as
much as the association between ruggedness
and economy depends upon continent.
a nation in Africa and outside Africa, holding its ruggedness constant. To do this, you can
just run link twice and then subtract the second result from the first:
R code
8.18
rugged_seq <- seq(from=-0.2,to=1.2,length.out=30)
muA <- link( m8.3 , data=data.frame(cid=1,rugged_std=rugged_seq) )
muN <- link( m8.3 , data=data.frame(cid=2,rugged_std=rugged_seq) )
delta <- muA - muN
Then you can summarize and plot the difference in expected log GDP contained in delta.
The result is shown in Figure 8.6. This plot is counter-factual. There is no raw data here.
Instead we are seeing through the model’s eyes and imagining comparisons between iden-
tical nations inside and outside Africa, as if we could independently manipulate continent
and also terrain ruggedness. Below the horizontal dashed line, African nations have lower
expected GDP. This is the case for most terrain ruggedness values. But at the highest rugged-
ness values, a nation is possibly better off inside Africa than outside it. Really it is hard to
find any reliable difference inside and outside Africa, at high ruggedness values. It is only in
smooth nations that being in Africa is a liability for the economy.
This perspective on the GDP and terrain ruggedness is completely consistent with the
previous perspective. It’s simultaneously true in these data (and with this model) that (1) the
influence of ruggedness depends upon continent and (2) the influence of continent depends
upon ruggedness. Indeed, something is gained by looking at the data in this symmetrical
perspective. Just inspecting the first view of the interaction, back on page 255, it’s not obvi-
ous that African nations are on average nearly always worse off. It’s just at very high values
of rugged that nations inside and outside of Africa have the same expected log GDP. This
second way of plotting the interaction makes this clearer.
Simple interactions are symmetric, just like the choice facing Buridan’s ass. Within the
model, there’s no basis to prefer one interpretation over the other, because in fact they are the
same interpretation. But when we reason causally about models, our minds tend to prefer
one interpretation over the other, because it’s usually easier to imagine manipulating one of
the predictor variables instead of the other. In this case, it’s hard to imagine manipulating
which continent a nation is on. But it’s easy to imagine manipulating terrain ruggedness,
by flattening hills or blasting tunnels through mountains.134 If in fact the explanation for
