7.4. PREDICTING PREDICTIVE ACCURACY
221
7.4. Predicting predictive accuracy
All of the preceding suggests one way to navigate overfitting and underfitting: Evaluate
our models out-of-sample. But we do not have the out-of-sample, by definition, so how can
we evaluate our models on it? There are two families of strategies: cross-validation and
information criteria. These strategies try to guess how well models will perform, on
average, in predicting new data. We’ll consider both approaches in more detail. Despite
subtle differences in their mathematics, they produce extremely similar approximations.
7.4.1. Cross-validation. A popular strategy for estimating predictive accuracy is to actually
test the model’s predictive accuracy on a small part of the sample. This is known as cross-
validation, leaving out a small chunk of observations from our sample and evaluating the
model on the observations that were left out. Of course we don’t want to leave out data.
So what is usually done is to divide the sample in a number of chunks, called “folds.” The
model is asked to predict each fold, after training on all the others. We then average over
the score for each fold to get an estimate of out-of-sample accuracy. The minimum number
of folds is 2. At the other extreme, you could make each point observation a fold and fit
as many models as you have individual observations. You can perform cross-validation on
quap models using the cv_quap function in the rethinking package.
How many folds should you use? This is an understudied question. A lot of advice states
that both too few and too many folds produce less reliable approximations of out-of-sample
performance. But simulation studies do not reliably find that this is the case.107 It is ex-
tremely common to use the maximum number of folds, resulting in leaving out one unique
observation in each fold. This is called leave-one-out cross-validation (often abbrevi-
ated as LOOCV). Leave-one-out cross-validation is what we’ll consider in this chapter, and
it is the default in cv_quap.
The key trouble with leave-one-out cross-validation is that, if we have 1000 observations,
that means computing 1000 posterior distributions. That can be time consuming. Luckily,
there are clever ways to approximate the cross-validation score without actually running the
model over and over again. One approach is to use the “importance” of each observation to
the posterior distribution. What “importance” means here is that some observations have
a larger impact on the posterior distribution—if we remove an important observation, the
posterior changes more. Other observations have less impact. It is a benign aspect of the uni-
verse that this importance can be estimated without refitting the model.108 The key intuition
is that an observation that is relatively unlikely is more important than one that is relatively
expected. When your expectations are violated, you should change your expectation more.
Bayesian inference works the same way. This importance is often called a weight, and these
weights can be used to estimate a model’s out-of-sample accuracy.
Smuggling a bunch of mathematical details under the carpet, this strategy results in a
fantastic approximation of the cross-validation score. The approximation goes by the awk-
ward name of Pareto-smoothed importance sampling cross-validation.109 We’ll
call it PSIS for short. You’ll also read it as PSIS-LOO, but since the word “loo” means a toilet,
let’s try to use a more noble name for this noble estimator. PSIS uses importance sampling,
which just means that it uses the importance weights approach described in the previous
paragraph. The Pareto-smoothing is a technique for making the importance weights more
reliable. Pareto is the name of a small town in northern Italy. But it is also the name of
an Italian scientist, Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), who made many important contributions.
One of these is known as the Pareto distribution. PSIS uses this distribution to derive
