7.2. ENTROPY AND ACCURACY
215
so easy. The reason is that taking doing arithmetic in a computer often requires some tricks to retain
precision. In doing probability calculations, it is usually safest to do everything on the log-probability
scale. Here’s the code we need, to repeat the calculation in the previous section:
R code
7.14
set.seed(1)
logprob <- sim( m7.1 , ll=TRUE , n=1e4 )
n <- ncol(logprob)
ns <- nrow(logprob)
f <- function( i ) log_sum_exp( logprob[,i] ) - log(ns)
( lppd <- sapply( 1:n , f ) )
You should see the same values as before. The code first calculates the log-probability of each obser-
vation, using sim. You used sim in Chapter 4 to simulate observations from the posterior. It can also
just return the log-probability, using ll=TRUE. It returns a matrix with a row for each sample and a
column for each observation. Then the function f does the hard work. log_sum_exp computes the
log of the sum of exponentiated values. So it takes all the log-probabilities for a given observation,
exponentiates each, sums them, then takes the log. But it does this in a way that is numerically stable.
Then the function subtracts the log of the number of samples, which is the same as dividing the sum
by the number of samples.
7.2.5. Scoring the right data. The log-probability score is a principled way to measure dis-
tance from the target. But the score as computed in the previous section has the same flaw
as R2: It always improves as the model gets more complex, at least for the types of models we
have considered so far. Just like R2, log-probability on training data is a measure of retrod-
ictive accuracy, not predictive accuracy. Let’s compute the log-score for each of the models
from earlier in this chapter:
R code
7.15
set.seed(1)
sapply( list(m7.1,m7.2,m7.3,m7.4,m7.5,m7.6) , function(m) sum(lppd(m)) )
[1]
2.490390
2.565982
3.695910
5.380871 14.089261 39.445390
The more complex models have larger scores! But we already know that they are absurd. We
simply cannot score models by their performance on training data. That way lies the monster
Scylla, devourer of naive data scientists.
It is really the score on new data that interests us. So before looking at tools for improving
and measuring out-of-sample score, let’s bring the problem into sharper focus by simulating
the score both in and out of sample. When we usually have data and use it to fit a statistical
model, the data comprise a training sample. Parameters are estimated from it, and then
we can imagine using those estimates to predict outcomes in a new sample, called the test
sample. R is going to do all of this for you. But here’s the full procedure, in outline:
(1) Suppose there’s a training sample of size N.
(2) Compute the posterior distribution of a model for the training sample, and com-
pute the score on the training sample. Call this score Dtrain.
(3) Suppose another sample of size N from the same process. This is the test sample.
(4) Compute the score on the test sample, using the posterior trained on the training
sample. Call this new score Dtest.
The above is a thought experiment. It allows us to explore the distinction between accuracy
measured in and out of sample, using a simple prediction scenario.
