188
6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR
But which principles explain why sometimes leaving out variables and sometimes adding
them can produce the same phenomenon? Are there other causal monsters lurking out there,
haunting our graphs? We require some coherence.
Let’s define confounding as any context in which the association between an outcome
Y and a predictor of interest X is not the same as it would be, if we had experimentally deter-
mined the values of X.92 For example, suppose we are interested in the association between
education E and wages W. The problem is that in a typical population there are many un-
observed variables U that influence both E and W. Examples include where a person lives,
who their parents are, and who their friends are. This is what the DAG looks like:
E
U
W
If we regress W on E, the estimate of the causal effect will be confounded by U. It is con-
founded, because there are two paths connecting E and W: (1) E →W and (2) E ←U →W.
A “path” here just means any series of variables you could walk through to get from one vari-
able to another, ignoring the directions of the arrows. Both of these paths create a statistical
association between E and W. But only the first path is causal. The second path is non-causal.
Why? Because if only the second path existed, and we changed E, it would not change W.
Any causal influence of E on W operates only on the first path.
How can we isolate the causal path? The most famous solution is to run an experiment.
If we could assign education levels at random, it changes the graph:
E
U
W
Manipulation removes the influence of U on E. The unobserved variables do not influence
education when we ourselves determine education. With the influence of U removed from
E, this then removes the path E ←U →W. It blocks the second path. Once the path is
blocked, there is only one way for information to go between E and W, and then measuring
the association between E and W would yield a useful measure of causal influence. Manipu-
lation removes the confounding, because it blocks the other path between E and W.
Luckily, there are statistical ways to achieve the same result, without actually manipulat-
ing E. How? The most obvious is to add U to the model, to condition on U. Why does this
also remove the confounding? Because it also blocks the flow of information between E and
W through U. It blocks the second path.
To understand why conditioning on U blocks the path E ←U →W, think of this path in
isolation, as a complete model. Once you learn U, also learning E will give you no additional
information about W. Suppose for example that U is the average wealth in a region. Regions
with high wealth have better schools, resulting in more education E, as well as better paying
jobs, resulting in higher wages W. If you don’t know the region a person lives in, learning
the person’s education E will provide information about their wages W, because E and W are
correlated across regions. But after you learn which region a person lives in, assuming there
is no other path between E and W, then learning E tells you nothing about W. This is the
