200
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
Now here’s the mathematical version of the first linear model:
bi ∼Normal(µi, σ)
µi = α + βmi
α ∼Normal(0.5, 1)
β ∼Normal(0, 10)
σ ∼Log-Normal(0, 1)
This simply says that the average brain volume bi of species i is a linear function of its body
mass mi. Now consider what the priors imply. The prior for α is just centered on the mean
brain volume (rescaled) in the data. So it says that the average species with an average body
mass has a brain volume with an 89% credible interval from about −1 to 2. That is ridicu-
lously wide and includes impossible (negative) values. The prior for β is very flat and cen-
tered on zero. It allows for absurdly large positive and negative relationships. These priors
allow for absurd inferences, especially as the model gets more complex. And that’s part of
the lesson, so let’s continue to fit the model now:
R code
7.3
m7.1 <- quap(
alist(
brain_std ~ dnorm( mu , exp(log_sigma) ),
mu <- a + b*mass_std,
a ~ dnorm( 0.5 , 1 ),
b ~ dnorm( 0 , 10 ),
log_sigma ~ dnorm( 0 , 1 )
), data=d )
Before pausing to plot the posterior distribution, like we did in previous chapters, let’s focus
on the R2, the proportion of variance “explained” by the model. What is really meant here is
that the linear model retrodicts some proportion of the total variation in the outcome data
it was fit to. The remaining variation is just the variation of the residuals (page 139).
Rethinking: OLS and Bayesian anti-essentialism. It would be possible to use the non-Bayesian strat-
egy of ordinary least squares (OLS) to get posterior distributions for these brain size models.
For example, you could use R’s simple lm function to get the posterior distribution for m6.1. You
won’t get a posterior for sigma however.
R code
7.4
m7.1_OLS <- lm( brain_std ~ mass_std , data=d )
post <- extract.samples( m7.1_OLS )
As long as the priors are vague, minimizing the sum of squared deviations to the regression line is
equivalent to finding the posterior mean. In fact, Carl Friedrich Gauss originally derived the OLS
procedure in a Bayesian framework.98 Back then, nearly all probability was Bayesian, although the
term “Bayesian” wouldn’t be used much until the 20th century. In most cases, a non-Bayesian proce-
dure will have an approximate Bayesian interpretation. This fact is powerful in both directions. The
Bayesian interpretation of a non-Bayesian procedure recasts assumptions in terms of information,
and this can be very useful for understanding why a procedure works. Likewise, a Bayesian model
can be embodied in a more efficient, but approximate, non-Bayesian procedure. Bayesian inference
means approximating the posterior distribution. It does not specify how that approximation is done.
