9 Markov Chain Monte Carlo
For most of Western history, chance has been a villain. In classical Rome, chance was
personified by Fortuna, goddess of cruel fate, with her spinning wheel of (mis)fortune. Op-
posed to her sat Minerva, goddess of wisdom and understanding. Only the desperate would
pray to Fortuna, while everyone implored Minerva for aid. Certainly science was the domain
of Minerva, a realm with no useful role for Fortuna to play.
But by the beginning of the 20th century, Fortuna and Minerva had become collabora-
tors. Scientists began publishing books of random numbers, instruments of chance to be
used for learning about the world. Chance and wisdom now cooperate, and few of us are
bewildered by the notion that an understanding of chance could help us acquire wisdom.
Everything from weather forecasting to finance to evolutionary biology is dominated by the
study of stochastic processes.137
This chapter introduces a marvelous example of Fortuna and Minerva’s cooperation:
the estimation of posterior probability distributions using a stochastic process known as
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Unlike the earlier chapters in this book, here
we’ll produce samples from the joint posterior without maximizing anything. Instead of hav-
ing to lean on quadratic and other approximations of the shape of the posterior, now we’ll be
able to sample directly from the posterior without assuming a Gaussian, or any other, shape
for it.
The cost of this power is that it may take much longer for our estimation to complete,
and usually more work is required to specify the model as well. But the benefit is escaping the
awkwardness of assuming multivariate normality. Equally important is the ability to directly
estimate models, such as the generalized linear and multilevel models of later chapters. Such
models routinely produce non-Gaussian posterior distributions, and sometimes they cannot
be estimated at all with the techniques of earlier chapters.
The good news is that tools for building and inspecting MCMC estimates are getting
better all the time. In this chapter you’ll meet a convenient way to convert the quap formulas
you’ve used so far into Markov chains. The engine that makes this possible is Stan (free and
online at: mc-stan.org). Stan’s creators describe it as “a probabilistic programming language
implementing statistical inference.” You won’t be working directly in Stan to begin with—
the rethinking package provides tools that hide it from you for now. But as you move
on to more advanced techniques, you’ll be able to generate Stan versions of the models you
already understand. Then you can tinker with them and witness the power of a fully armed
and operational Stan.
269
