6.6. PRACTICE
193
regression as a substitute for theory. But DAGs are not a destination. Once you have a dynamical
model of your system, you don’t need a DAG. In fact, many dynamical systems cannot be usefully
represented by DAGs, because they have complex behavior that is sensitive to initial conditions. But
these models can still be analyzed and causal interventions designed from them. The fact that DAGs
are not useful for everything is no argument against them. All theory tools have limitations. I have
yet to see a better tool than DAGs for teaching the mechanics of and obstacles to causal inference.
Overthinking: A smooth operator. To define confounding with precise notation, we need to adopt
something called the do-operator.93 Confounding occurs when:
Pr(Y|X)̸ = Pr(Y|do(X))
That do(X) means to cut all of the backdoor paths into X, as if we did a manipulative experiment. The
do-operator changes the graph, closing the backdoors. The do-operator defines a causal relationship,
because Pr(Y|do(X)) tells us the expected result of manipulating X on Y, given a causal graph. We
might say that some variable X is a cause of Y when Pr(Y|do(X)) > Pr(Y|do(not-X)). The ordinary
conditional probability comparison, Pr(Y|X) > Pr(Y|not-X), is not the same. It does not close the
backdoor. Note that what the do-operator gives you is not just the direct causal effect. It is the total
causal effect through all forward paths. To get a direct causal effect, you might have to close more
doors. The do-operator can also be used to derive causal inference strategies even when some back
doors cannot be closed. We’ll look at a couple in a later chapter.
6.5. Summary
Multiple regression is no oracle. It is logical, but the relationships it describes are condi-
tional associations, not causal influences. Therefore additional information, from outside the
model, is needed to make sense of it. This chapter presented introductory examples of some
common frustrations: multicollinearity, post-treatment bias, and collider bias. Solutions
to these frustrations can be organized under a coherent framework in which hypothetical
causal relations among variables are analyzed to locate and cope with confounding. In all
cases, causal models exist outside the statistical model and can be difficult to test. However,
it is possible to reach valid causal inferences in the absence of experiments. This is good
news, because we often cannot perform experiments, both for practical and ethical reasons.
6.6. Practice
Easy. x
Medium.
6M1. Modify the DAG on page 190 to include the variable V, an unobserved cause of C and Y:
C ←V →Y. Reanalyze the DAG. How many paths connect X to Y? Which must be closed? Which
variables should you condition on now?
Hard.
6H1. Use the Waffle House data, data(WaffleDivorce), to find the total causal influence of num-
ber of Waffle Houses on divorce rate. Justify your model or models with a causal graph.
