240
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
Hard.
7H1. In 2007, The Wall Street Journal published an editorial (“We’re Num-
ber One, Alas”) with a graph of corporate tax rates in 29 countries plot-
ted against tax revenue. A badly fit curve was drawn in (reconstructed
at right), seemingly by hand, to make the argument that the relationship
between tax rate and tax revenue increases and then declines, such that
higher tax rates can actually produce less tax revenue. I want you to actu-
ally fit a curve to these data, found in data(Laffer). Consider models
that use tax rate to predict tax revenue. Compare, using WAIC or PSIS, a
straight-line model to any curved models you like. What do you conclude
about the relationship between tax rate and tax revenue?
0
10
20
30
0
5
10
7H2. In the Laffer data, there is one country with a high tax revenue that is an outlier. Use PSIS
and WAIC to measure the importance of this outlier in the models you fit in the previous problem.
Then use robust regression with a Student’s t distribution to revisit the curve fitting problem. How
much does a curved relationship depend upon the outlier point?
7H3. Consider three fictional Polynesian islands. On each there is a Royal Ornithologist charged by
the king with surveying the bird population. They have each found the following proportions of 5
important bird species:
Species A
Species B
Species C
Species D
Species E
Island 1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Island 2
0.8
0.1
0.05
0.025
0.025
Island 3
0.05
0.15
0.7
0.05
0.05
Notice that each row sums to 1, all the birds. This problem has two parts. It is not computationally
complicated. But it is conceptually tricky. First, compute the entropy of each island’s bird distribution.
Interpret these entropy values. Second, use each island’s bird distribution to predict the other two.
This means to compute the K-L Divergence of each island from the others, treating each island as if
it were a statistical model of the other islands. You should end up with 6 different K-L Divergence
values. Which island predicts the others best? Why?
7H4. Recall the marriage, age, and happiness collider bias example from Chapter 6. Run models
m6.9 and m6.10 again. Compare these two models using WAIC (or LOO, they will produce identical
results). Which model is expected to make better predictions? Which model provides the correct
causal inference about the influence of age on happiness? Can you explain why the answers to these
two questions disagree?
7H5. Revisit the urban fox data, data(foxes), from the previous chapter’s practice problems. Use
WAIC or PSIS based model comparison on five different models, each using weight as the outcome,
and containing these sets of predictor variables:
(1) avgfood + groupsize + area
(2) avgfood + groupsize
(3) groupsize + area
(4) avgfood
(5) area
Can you explain the relative differences in WAIC scores, using the fox DAG from last week’s home-
work? Be sure to pay attention to the standard error of the score differences (dSE).
