7.5. MODEL COMPARISON
237
-4
-2
0
2
4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
value
Density
Gaussian
Student-t
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
value
minus log Density
Gaussian
Student-t
Figure 7.11. Thin tails and influential observations. The Gaussian distribu-
tion (blue) assigns very little probability to extreme observations. It has thin
tails. The Student-t distribution with shape ν = 2 (black) assigns more prob-
ability to extreme events. These distributions are compared on the proba-
bility (left) and log-probability (right) scales.
not. Instead many phenomena have thicker tails with rare, extreme observations. These are
not measurement errors, but real events containing information about natural process.
One way to both use these extreme observations and reduce their influence is to employ
some kind of robust regression. A “robust regression” can mean many different things,
but usually it indicates a linear model in which the influence of extreme observations is re-
duced. A common and useful kind of robust regression is to replace the Gaussian model
with a thicker-tailed distribution like Student’s t (or “Student-t”) distribution.124 This dis-
tribution has nothing to do with students. The Student-t distribution arises from a mixture
of Gaussian distributions with different variances.125 If the variances are diverse, then the
tails can be quite thick.
The generalized Student-t distribution has the same mean µ and scale σ parameters as
the Gaussian, but it also has an extra shape parameter ν that controls how thick the tails
are. The rethinking package provides Student-t as dstudent. When ν is large, the tails
are thin, converging in the limit ν = ∞to a Gaussian distribution. But as ν approaches 1,
the tails get thicker and rare extreme observations occur more often. Figure 7.11 compares
a Gaussian distribution (in blue) to a corresponding Student-t distribution (in black) with
ν = 2. The Student-t distribution has thicker tails, and this is most obvious on the log
scale (right), where the Gaussian tails shrink quadratically—a normal distribution is just an
exponentiated parabola remember—while the Student-t tails shrink much more slowly.
If you have a very large data set with such events, you could estimate ν. Financial time
series, taken over very long periods, are one example. But when using robust regression, we
don’t usually try to estimate ν, because there aren’t enough extreme observations to do so.
Instead we assume ν is small (thick tails) in order to reduce the influence of outliers. For
example, if we use the severity of wars since 1950 to estimate a trend, the estimate is likely
biased by the fact that big conflicts like the first and second World Wars are rare. They reside
