278
9. MARKOV CHAIN MONTE CARLO
0
100
200
300
time
position
0
south
north
Figure 9.5. King Monty’s Royal Drive. The journey begins at time 1 on
the far left. The vehicle is given a random momentum and a random direc-
tion, either north (top) or south (bottom). The thickness of the path shows
momentum at each moment. The vehicle travels, losing momentum uphill
or gaining it downhill. After a fixed amount of time, they stop and make
a visit, as shown by the points. Then a new random direction and momen-
tum is chosen. In the long run, positions are visited in proportion to their
population density.
to adopt this Hamiltonian strategy, but he cannot: The islands are not continuous. Hamilton’s
approach only works when all the locations are connected by dry land, because it requires
that the vehicle be capable of stopping at any point.
Rethinking: Hamiltonians. The Hamilton who gives his name to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo had
nothing to do with the development of the method. Sir William Rowan Hamilton (1805–1865) was
an Irish mathematician, arguably the greatest mathematician of his generation. Hamilton accomplish
great things in pure mathematics, but he also dabbled in physics and reformulated Newtons laws of
motion into a new system that we now call Hamiltonian mechanics (or dynamics). Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo was originally called Hybrid Monte Carlo, but is now usually referred to by the
Hamiltonian differential equations that drive it.
9.3.2. Particles in space. This story of King Monty is analogous to how the actual Hamil-
tonian Monte Carlo algorithm works. In statistical applications, the royal vehicle is the cur-
rent vector of parameter values. Let’s consider the single parameter case, just to keep things
simple. In that case, the log-posterior is like a bowl, with the point of highest posterior prob-
ability at its nadir, in the center of the valley. Then we give the particle a random flick—give
it some momentum—and simulate its path. It must obey the physics, gliding along until we
stop the clock and take a sample.
This is not another metaphor. HMC really does run a physics simulation, pretending
the vector of parameters gives the position of a little frictionless particle. The log-posterior
provides a surface for this particle to glide across. When the log-posterior is very flat, because
