8 Conditional Manatees
The manatee (Trichechus manatus) is a slow-moving, aquatic mammal that lives in warm,
shallow water. Manatees have no natural predators, but they do share their waters with motor
boats. And motor boats have propellers. While manatees are related to elephants and have
very thick skins, propeller blades can and do kill them. A majority of adult manatees bear
some kind of scar earned in a collision with a boat (Figure 8.1, top).128
The Armstrong Whitworth A.W.38 Whitley was a frontline Royal Air Force bomber.
During the second World War, the A.W.38 carried bombs and pamphlets into German ter-
ritory. Unlike the manatee, the A.W.38 has fierce natural enemies: artillery and interceptor
fire. Many planes never returned from their missions. And those that survived had the scars
to prove it (Figure 8.1, bottom).
How is a manatee like an A.W.38 bomber? In both cases—manatee propeller scars and
bomber bullet holes—we’d like to do something to improve the odds, to help manatees and
bombers survive. Most observers intuit that helping manatees or bombers means reducing
the kind of damage we see on them. For manatees, this might mean requiring propeller
guards (on the boats, not the manatees). For bombers, it’d mean adding armor to the parts
of the plane that show the most damage.
But in both cases, the evidence misleads us. Propellers do not cause most of the injury
and death caused to manatees. Rather autopsies confirm that collisions with blunt parts of
the boat, like the keel, do far more damage. Similarly, up-armoring the damaged portions of
returning bombers did little good. Instead, improving the A.W.38 bomber meant armoring
the undamaged sections.129 The evidence from surviving manatees and bombers is mislead-
ing, because it is conditional on survival. Manatees and bombers that perished look different.
A manatee struck by a keel is less likely to live than another grazed by a propeller. So among
the survivors, propeller scars are common. Similarly, bombers that returned home conspic-
uously lacked damage to the cockpit and engines. They got lucky. Bombers that never re-
turned home were less so. To get the right answer, in either context, we have to realize that
the kind of damage seen is conditional on survival.
Conditioning is one of the most important principles of statistical inference. Data,
like the manatee scars and bomber damage, are conditional on how they get into our sample.
Posterior distributions are conditional on the data. All model-based inference is conditional
on the model. Every inference is conditional on something, whether we notice it or not.
And a large part of the power of statistical modeling comes from creating devices that
allow probability to be conditional of aspects of each case. The linear models you’ve grown to
love are just crude devices that allow each outcome yi to be conditional on a set of predictors
for each case i. Like the epicycles of the Ptolemaic and Kopernikan models (Chapters 4 and
7), linear models give us a way to describe conditionality.
241
