214
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
All of this also means that all we need to know is a model’s average log-probability:
E log(qi) for q and E log(ri) for r. These expressions look a lot like log-probabilities of out-
comes you’ve been using already to simulate implied predictions of a fit model. Indeed, just
summing the log-probabilities of each observed case provides an approximation of E log(qi).
We don’t have to know the p inside the expectation.
So we can compare the average log-probability from each model to get an estimate of the
relative distance of each model from the target. This also means that the absolute magnitude
of these values will not be interpretable—neither E log(qi) nor E log(ri) by itself suggests a
good or bad model. Only the difference E log(qi)−E log(ri) informs us about the divergence
of each model from the target p.
To put all this into practice, it is conventional to sum over all the observations i, yielding
a total score for a model q:
S(q) =
X
i
log(qi)
This kind of score is a log-probability score, and it is the gold standard way to compare the
predictive accuracy of different models. It is an estimate of E log(qi), just without the final
step of dividing by the number of observations.
To compute this score for a Bayesian model, we have to use the entire posterior distribu-
tion. Otherwise, vengeful angels will descend upon you. Why will they be angry? If we don’t
use the entire posterior, we are throwing away information. Because the parameters have dis-
tributions, the predictions also have a distribution. How can we use the entire distribution of
predictions? We need to find the log of the average probability for each observation i, where
the average is taken over the posterior distribution. Doing this calculation correctly requires
a little subtlety. The rethinking package has a function called lppd—log-pointwise-
predictive-density—to do this calculation for quap models. If you are interested in the
subtle details, however, see the box at the end of this section. To compute For the first model
we fit in this chapter:
R code
7.13
set.seed(1)
lppd( m7.1 , n=1e4 )
[1]
0.6098668
0.6483438
0.5496093
0.6234934
0.4648143
0.4347605 -0.8444633
Each of these values is the log-probability score for a specific observation. Recall that there
were only 7 observations in those data. If you sum these values, you’ll have the total log-
probability score for the model and data. What do these values mean? Larger values are
better, because that indicates larger average accuracy. It also quite common to see something
called the deviance, which is like a lppd score, but multiplied by −2 so that smaller values
are better. The 2 is there for historical reasons.106
Overthinking: Computing the lppd. The Bayesian version of the log-probability score is called the
log-pointwise-predictive-density. For some data y and posterior distribution Θ:
lppd(y, Θ) =
X
i
log 1
S
X
s
p(yi|Θs)
where S is the number of samples and Θs is the s-th set of sampled parameter values in the posterior
distribution. While in principle this is easy—you just need to compute the probability (density) of
each observation i for each sample s, take the average, and then the logarithm—in practice it is not
