7.2. ENTROPY AND ACCURACY
217
deviance means a better fit. So this decline with increasing model complexity is the same
phenomenon you saw earlier in the chapter with R2.
But now inspect the open points and black line segments. These display the distribu-
tion of out-of-sample deviance at each number of parameters. While the training deviance
always gets better with an additional parameter, the test deviance is smallest on average for
3 parameters, which is the data-generating model in this case. The deviance out-of-sample
gets worse (increases) with the addition of each parameter after the third. These additional
parameters fit the noise in the additional predictors. So while deviance keeps improving (de-
clining) in the training sample, it gets worse on average in the test sample. The right-hand
plot shows the same relationships for larger samples of N = 100 cases.
The size of the standard deviation bars may surprise you. While it is always true on
average that deviance out-of-sample is worse than deviance in-sample, any individual pair
of train and test samples may reverse the expectation. The reason is that any given training
sample may be highly misleading. And any given testing sample may be unrepresentative.
Keep this fact in mind as we develop devices for comparing models, because this fact should
prevent you from placing too much confidence in analysis of any particular sample. Like all
of statistical inference, there are no guarantees here.
On that note, there is also no guarantee that the “true” data-generating model will have
the smallest average out-of-sample deviance. You can see a symptom of this fact in the de-
viance for the 2 parameter model. That model does worse in prediction than the model with
only 1 parameter, even though the true model does include the additional predictor. This is
because with only N = 20 cases, the imprecision of the estimate for the first predictor pro-
duces more error than just ignoring it. In the right-hand plot, in contrast, there is enough
data to precisely estimate the association between the first predictor and the outcome. Now
the deviance for the 2 parameter model is better than that of the 1 parameter model.
Deviance is an assessment of predictive accuracy, not of truth. The true model, in terms
of which predictors are included, is not guaranteed to produce the best predictions. Likewise
a false model, in terms of which predictors are included, is not guaranteed to produce poor
predictions.
The point of this thought experiment is to demonstrate how deviance behaves, in the-
ory. While deviance on training data always improves with additional predictor variables,
deviance on future data may or may not, depending upon both the true data-generating pro-
cess and how much data is available to precisely estimate the parameters. These facts form
the basis for understanding both regularizing priors and information criteria.
Overthinking: Simulated training and testing. To reproduce Figure 7.6, sim.train.test is run
10,000 (1e4) times for each of the 5 models. This code is sufficient to run all of the simulations:
R code
7.16
N <- 20
kseq <- 1:5
dev <- sapply( kseq , function(k) {
print(k);
r <- replicate( 1e4 , sim_train_test( N=N, k=k ) );
c( mean(r[1,]) , mean(r[2,]) , sd(r[1,]) , sd(r[2,]) )
} )
If you use Mac OS or Linux, you can parallelize the simulations by replacing the replicate line with:
