184
6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR
The pattern above is exactly what we should expect when we condition on a collider.
The collider is marriage status. It a common consequence of age and happiness. As a result,
when we condition on it, we induce a spurious association between the two causes. So it
looks like, to model m6.9, that age is negatively associated with happiness. But this is just a
statistical association, not a causal association. Once we know whether someone is married
or not, then their age does provide information about how happy they are.
You can see this in Figure 6.4. Consider only the blue points, the married people.
Among only the blue points, older individuals have lower average happiness. This is because
more people get marriage at time goes on, so the mean happiness among married people ap-
proaches the population average of zero. Now consider only the open points, the unmarried
people. Here it is also true that mean happiness declines with age. This is because happier
individuals migrate over time into the married sub-population. So in both the married and
unmarried sub-populations, there is a negative relationship between age and happiness. But
in neither sub-population does this accurately reflect causation.
It’s easy to plead with this example. Shouldn’t marriage also influence happiness? What
if happiness does change with age? But this misses the point. If you don’t have a causal
model, you can’t make inferences from a multiple regression. And the regression itself does
not provide the evidence you need to justify a causal model. Instead, you need some science.
6.3.2. ThehauntedDAG. Collider bias arises from conditioningona commonconsequence,
as in the previous example. If we can just get our graph sorted, we can avoid it. But it isn’t
always so easy to see a potential collider, because there may be unmeasured causes. Unmea-
sured causes can still induce collider bias. So I’m sorry to say that we also have to consider
the possibility that our DAG may be haunted.
Suppose for example that we are interested in inferring the direct influence of both par-
ents (P) and grandparents (G) on the educational achievement of children (C).90 Since grand-
parents also presumably influence their own children’s education, there is an arrow G →P.
This sounds pretty easy, so far. It’s similar in structure to our divorce rate example from last
chapter:
C
G
P
But suppose there are unmeasured, common influences on parents and their children, such
as neighborhoods, that are not shared by grandparents (who live on the south coast of Spain
now). Then our DAG becomes haunted by the unobserved U:
C
G
P
U
