7.4. PREDICTING PREDICTIVE ACCURACY
227
[1] 17.81628
As models get more complicated, all that usually changes is how the log-probabilities, logprob, are
computed.
Note that each individual observation has its own penalty term in the pWAIC vector we calculated
above. This provides an interesting opportunity to study how different observations contribute to
overfitting. You can get the same vectorized pointwise output from the WAIC function by using the
pointwise=TRUE argument.
7.4.3. Comparing CV, PSIS, and WAIC. With definitions of cross-validation, PSIS, and
WAIC in hand, let’s conduct another simulation exercise. This will let us visualize the esti-
mates of out-of-sample deviance that these criteria provide, in the same familiar context as
earlier sections. Our interest is in seeing how well the criteria approximate out-of-sample
accuracy. Can they guess the overfitting risk?
Figure 7.9 shows the results of 1000 simulations each for the five familiar models with
between 1 and 5 parameters, simulated under two different sets of priors and two different
sample sizes. The plot is complicated. But taking it one piece at a time, all the parts are
already familiar. Focus for now just on the top-left plot, where N = 20. The vertical axis
is the out-of-sample deviance (−2lppd). The open points show the average out-of-sample
deviance for models fit with flat priors. The filled points show the average out-of-sample
deviance for models fit with regularizing priors with a standard deviation of 0.5. Notice that
the regularizing priors overfit less, just as you saw in the previous section about regularizing
priors. So that isn’t new.
We are interested now in how well CV, PSIS, and WAIC approximate these points. Still
focusing on the top-left plot in Figure 7.9, there are trend lines for each criterion. Solid
black trends show WAIC. Solid blue trends show full cross-validation, computed by fitting
the model N times. The dashed blue trends are PSIS. Notice that all three criteria do a good
job of guessing the average out-of-sample score, whether the models used flat (upper trends)
or regularizing (lower trends) priors. Provided the process generating data remains the same,
it really is possible to use a single sample to guess the accuracy of our predictions.
While all three criteria get the expected out-of-sample deviance approximately correct,
it is also true that in any particular sample they usually miss it by some amount. So we should
look at the average error in addition to the average value. The upper-right plot makes the
average error of each measure easier to see. Now the vertical axis is the average absolute
difference between the out-of-sample deviance and each criterion. WAIC (black trend) is
slightly better on average. The bottom row repeats these plots but for a larger sample size,
N = 100. With a sample this large, in a family of models this simple, all three criteria become
identical.
WAIC is unsurprisingly a little better at predicting out-of-sample deviance, because that
is what it aims to predict. Cross-validation (CV) is a trick that estimates out-of-sample de-
viance as the sample size increases, but it doesn’t aim for the right target at small sample
sizes. And since PSIS approximates CV, it has the same issue. All three do a very good job
on average (bottom left), and all three have the same error (bottom right).
PSIS and WAIC perform very similarly in the context of ordinary linear models.120 If
there are important differences, they lie in other model types, where the posterior distribu-
tion is not approximately Gaussian or in the presence of observations that strongly influence
the posterior. CV and PSIS have higher variance as estimators of the K-L Divergence, and so
we should expect WAIC to be better in many cases.121 However, in practice the advantage
