8.1. BUILDING AN INTERACTION
249
You can extract the prior and plot the implied lines using the same code as before. The result
is shown on the right side of Figure 8.3. Some of these slopes are still implausibly strong.
But in the main, this is a much better set of priors.
Let’s look at the posterior distribution now:
R code
8.6
precis( m8.1 )
mean
sd
5.5% 94.5%
a
1.00 0.01
0.98
1.02
b
0.00 0.05 -0.09
0.09
sigma 0.14 0.01
0.12
0.15
Really no overall association between terrain ruggedness and log GDP. Next we’ll see how to
split apart the continents.
Rethinking: Practicing for when it matters. The exercise in Figure 8.3 is really not necessary in
this example, because there is enough data, and the model is simple enough, that even awful priors
get washed out. You could even use completely flat priors (don’t!), and it would all be fine. But we
practice doing things right not because it always matters. Rather, we practice doing things right so
that we are ready when it matters.
8.1.2. Adding an indicator variable isn’t enough. The first thing to realize is that just in-
cluding an indicator variable for African nations, cont_africa here, won’t reveal the re-
versed slope. It’s worth fitting this model to prove it to yourself, though. I’m going to walk
through this as a simple model comparison exercise, just so you begin to get some applied
examples of concepts you’ve accumulated from earlier chapters. Note that model compari-
son here is not about selecting a model. Scientific considerations already select the relevant
model. Instead it is about measuring the impact of model differences while accounting for
overfitting risk.
To build a model that allows nations inside and outside Africa to have different inter-
cepts, we need to modify the model for µi so that the mean is conditional on continent. The
conventional way to do this would be to just add another term to the linear model:
µi = α + β(ri −¯r) + γAi
where Ai is cont_africa, a 0/1 indicator variable. But let’s not follow this convention. In
fact, this convention is often a bad idea. It took me years to figure this out, and I’m trying to
save you from the horrors I’ve seen. The problem here, and in general, is that we need a prior
for γ. Okay, we can do priors. But what that prior will necessarily do is tell the model that
µi for a nation in Africa is more uncertain, before seeing the data, than µi outside Africa.
And that makes no sense. This is the same issue we confronted back in Chapter 4, when I
introduced categorical variables.
There is a simple solution: Nations in Africa will get one intercept and those outside
Africa another. This is what µi looks like now:
µi = αcid[i] + β(ri −¯r)
where cid is an index variable, continent ID. It takes the value 1 for African nations and 2 for
all other nations. This means there are two parameters, α1 and α2, one for each unique index
value. The notation cid[i] just means the value of cid on row i. I use the bracket notation
