208
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
7.2.1.2. Measuring accuracy. But even if we ignore costs and benefits of any actual deci-
sion based upon the forecasts, there’s still ambiguity about which measure of “accuracy” to
adopt. There’s nothing special about “hit rate.” The question to focus on is: Which definition
of “accuracy” is maximized by knowing the true model generating the data? Surely we can’t
do better than that.
Consider computing the probability of predicting the exact sequence of days. This means
computing the probability of a correct prediction for each day. Then multiply all of these
probabilities together to get the joint probability of correctly predicting the observed se-
quence. This is the same thing as the joint likelihood, which you’ve been using up to this
point to fit models with Bayes’ theorem. This is the definition of accuracy that is maximized
by the correct model.
In this light, the newcomer looks even worse. The probability for the current weather-
person is 13 × 0.47 ≈0.005. For the newcomer, it’s 03 × 17 = 0. So the newcomer has zero
probability of getting the sequence correct. This is because the newcomer’s predictions never
expect rain. So even though the newcomer has a high average probability of being correct
(hit rate), he has a terrible joint probability of being correct.
And the joint probability is the measure we want. Why? Because it appears in Bayes’ the-
orem as the likelihood. It’s the unique measure that correctly counts up the relative number
of ways each event (sequence of rain and shine) could happen. Another way to think of this
is to consider what happens when we maximize average probability or joint probability. The
true data-generating model will not have the highest hit rate. You saw this already with the
weatherperson: Assigning zero probability to rain improves hit rate, but it is clearly wrong.
In contrast, the true model will have the highest joint probability.
In the statistics literature, you will sometimes see this measure of accuracy called the
log scoring rule, because typically we compute the logarithm of the joint probability and
report that. If you see an analysis using something else, either it is a special case of the log
scoring rule or it is a mistake.
Rethinking: What is a true model? It’s hard to define “true” probabilities, because all models are
false. So what does “truth” mean in this context? It means the right probabilities, given our state
of ignorance. Our state of ignorance is described by the model. The probability is in the model,
not in the world. If we had all of the information relevant to producing a forecast, then rain or sun
would be deterministic, and the “true” probabilities would be just 0’s and 1’s. Absent some relevant
information, as in all modeling, outcomes in the small world are uncertain, even though they remain
perfectly deterministic in the large world. Because of our ignorance, we can have “true” probabilities
between zero and one.
An example might help. Suppose you toss the globe, as in Chapter 2. Before you catch it, the
outcome is uncertain. There is a “true” probability of observing water, conditional on our assumed
model. But if we had enough information about the globe toss—initial conditions, angular momen-
tum vector, and such—then the outcome would be knowable with certainty. No two tosses are ever
exactly alike, so the “true” probability of observing water must average over the unknown differences
to describe the relative plausibility of water compared to land. There is a right answer to the question
this model poses—70% water. It’s our ignorance of the physics of the globe toss that leads us to use
it as a way to estimate the amount of water on the surface.
7.2.2. Information and uncertainty. So we want to use the log probability of the data to
score the accuracy of competing models. The next problem is how to measure distance from
perfect prediction. A perfect prediction would just report the true probabilities of rain on
