196
7. ULYSSES’ COMPASS
Ptolemaic Model
Copernican Model
Earth
Earth
Sun
Sun
Figure 7.1. Ptolemaic (left) and Kopernikan (right) models of the solar
system. Both models use epicycles (circles on circles), and both models
produce exactly the same predictions. However, the Kopernikan model re-
quires fewer circles. (Not all Ptolemaic epicycles are visible in the figure.)
So instead of Ockham’s razor, think of Ulysses’ compass. Ulysses was the hero of Homer’s
Odyssey. During his voyage, Ulysses had to navigate a narrow straight between the many-
headed beast Scylla—who attacked from a cliff face and gobbled up sailors—and the sea
monster Charybdis—who pulled boats and men down to a watery grave. Passing too close
to either meant disaster. In the context of scientific models, you can think of these monsters
as representing two fundamental kinds of statistical error:
(1) The many-headed beast of overfitting, which leads to poor prediction by learn-
ing too much from the data
(2) The whirlpool of underfitting, which leads to poor prediction by learning too
little from the data
There is a third monster, the one you met in previous chapters—confounding. In this
chapter you’ll see that confounded models can in fact produce better predictions than models
that correctly measure a causal relationship. The consequence of this is that, when we design
any particular statistical model, we must decide whether we want to understand causes or
rather just predict. These are not the same goal, and different models are needed for each.
However, to accurately measure a causal influence, we still have to deal with overfitting. The
monsters of overfitting and underfitting are always lurking, no matter the goal.
Our job is to carefully navigate among these monsters. There are two common families
of approaches. The first approach is to use a regularizing prior to tell the model not to
get too excited by the data. This is the same device that non-Bayesian methods refer to as
“penalized likelihood.” The second approach is to use some scoring device, like informa-
tion criteria or cross validation, to model the prediction task and estimate predictive
accuracy. Both families of approaches are routinely used in the natural and social sciences.
Furthermore, they can be—maybe should be—used in combination. So it’s worth under-
standing both, as you’re going to need both at some point.
