6.4. CONFRONTING CONFOUNDING
189
The Fork
The Pipe
The Collider
The Descendant
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
X
Y
Z
D
X
Y
Z
Figure 6.6. The four elemental confounds. Any directed acyclic graph is
built from these elementary relationships.
sense in which condition on U blocks the path—it makes E and W independent, conditional
on U.
6.4.1. Shutting the backdoor. Blocking all confounding paths between some predictor X
and some outcome Y is known as shutting the backdoor. The metaphor in play is that we
don’t want any spurious correlation sneaking in through a non-causal path, which is one that
enters the back of the predictor X. In the example above, the path E ←U →W is a backdoor
path, because it enters E with an arrow and also connects E to W. This path is confounding.
Now for some good news. Given a causal DAG, it is always possible to say which, if any,
variables one must control for in order to shut all the backdoor paths. It is also possible to
say which variables one must not control for, in order to leave the path of interest open.
And—some more good news—there are only four types of variable relations that com-
bine to form all possible paths. So you really only need to understand four things and how
information flows in each of them. I’ll define the four types of relations. Then we’ll work
through some examples.
Figure 6.6 shows DAGs for each elemental relation. Every DAG, no matter how big and
complicated, is built out of these four relations. Let’s consider each, going left to right.
(1) The first type of relation is the one we worked with just above, a fork: X ←Z →Y.
This is the classic confounder. In a fork, some variable Z is a common cause of X
and Y, generating a correlation between them. If we condition on Z, then learning
X tells us nothing about Y. X and Y are independent, conditional on Z.
(2) The second type of relation is a pipe: X →Z →Y. We saw this when we discussed
the plant growth example and post-treatment bias: The treatment X influences fun-
gus Z which influences growth Y. If we condition on Z now, we also block the path
from X to Y. So in both a fork and a pipe, conditioning of the middle variable
blocks the path.
(3) The third type of relation is a collider: X →Z ←Y. You met colliders earlier
in this chapter. Unlike the other two types of relations, in a collider there is no
association between X and Y unless you condition on Z. Conditioning on Z, the
collider variable, opens the path. Once the path is open, information flows between
X and Y.
(4) The fourth bit of knowledge you need is that conditioning on a descendent vari-
able is like conditioning on the variable itself, but weaker. A descendent is a variable
influenced by another variable. In the far right DAG in Figure 6.6, controlling for
