7.1. THE PROBLEM WITH PARAMETERS
199
Here’s an example of overfitting. The data displayed in Figure 7.2 are average brain
volumes and body masses for seven hominin species.97 Let’s get these data into R, so you
can work with them. I’m going to build these data from direct input, rather than loading a
pre-made data frame, just so you see an example of how to build a data frame from scratch.
R code
7.1
sppnames <- c( "afarensis","africanus","habilis","boisei",
"rudolfensis","ergaster","sapiens")
brainvolcc <- c( 438 , 452 , 612, 521, 752, 871, 1350 )
masskg <- c( 37.0 , 35.5 , 34.5 , 41.5 , 55.5 , 61.0 , 53.5 )
d <- data.frame( species=sppnames , brain=brainvolcc , mass=masskg )
Now you have a data frame, d, containing the brain size and body size values. It’s not un-
usual for data like this to be highly correlated—brain size is correlated with body size, across
species. A standing question, however, is to what extent particular species have brains that
are larger than we’d expect, after taking body size into account. A common solution is to fit a
linear regression that models brain size as a linear function of body size. Then the remaining
variation in brain size can be modeled as a function of other variables, like ecology or diet.
This is the same “statistical control” strategy explained in previous chapters.
Controlling for body size however depends upon having a good functional mapping of
the association between body size and brain size. We’ve just used linear functions so far.
But why use a line to relate body size to brain size? It’s not clear why nature demands that
the relationship among species be a straight line. Why not consider a curved model, like a
parabola? Indeed, why not a cubic function of body size, or even a quintic model? I agree
that there’s no reason yet given to suppose a priori that brain size scales only linearly with
body size. Indeed, many readers will prefer to model a linear relationship between log brain
volume and log body mass (an exponential relationship). But that’s not the direction I’m
headed with this example. The lesson here will arise, no matter how we transform the data.
Even after a log transform of both variables, there’s no reason to insist that linear is the only
imaginable relationship.
Let’s fit a series of increasingly complex model families and see which function fits the
data best. We’ll use polynomial regressions, so review Section 4.5 (page 113) if necessary.
Importantly, recall that polynomial regressions are common, but usually a bad idea. In this
example, I will show you that they can be a very bad idea when used blindly.
The simplest model that relates brain size to body size is the linear one. It will be the
first model we consider. Before writing out the model, let’s rescale the variables. Recall from
earlier chapters that rescaling predictor and outcome variables is often helpful in getting the
model to fit and in specifying and understanding the priors. In this case, we want to stan-
dardize body mass—give it mean zero and standard deviation one—and rescale the outcome,
brain volume, so that the largest observed value is 1. Why not standardize brain volume as
well? Because we want to preserve zero as a reference point: No brain at all. You can’t have
negative brain. I don’t think.
R code
7.2
d$mass_std <- (d$mass - mean(d$mass))/sd(d$mass)
d$brain_std <- d$brain / max(d$brain)
