7.2. ENTROPY AND ACCURACY
213
provide a probability distribution q to approximate the actual distribution on Mars, p. For the Earth,
q = {0.7, 0.3}, for probability of water and land, respectively. Mars is very dry, but let’s say for the
sake of the example that there is 1% surface water, so p = {0.01, 0.99}. If we count the ice caps,
that’s not too big a lie. Now compute the divergence going from Earth to Mars. It turns out to be
DE→M = DKL(p, q) = 1.14. That’s the additional uncertainty induced by using the Earth to predict
the Martian landing spot. Now consider going back the other direction. The numbers in p and q stay
the same, but we swap their roles, and now DM→E = DKL(q, p) = 2.62. The divergence is more than
double in this direction. This result seems to defy comprehension. How can the distance from Earth
to Mars be shorter than the distance from Mars to Earth?
Divergence behaves this way as a feature, not a bug. There really is more additional uncertainty
induced by using Mars to predict Earth than by using Earth to predict Mars. The reason is that, going
from Mars to Earth, Mars has so little water on its surface that we will be very very surprised when
we most likely land in water on Earth. In contrast, Earth has good amounts of both water and dry
land. So when we use the Earth to predict Mars, we expect both water and land, to some extent, even
though we do expect more water than land. So we won’t be nearly as surprised when we inevitably
arrive on Martian dry land, because 30% of Earth is dry land.
An important practical consequence of this asymmetry, in a model fitting context, is that if we
use a distribution with high entropy to approximate an unknown true distribution of events, we will
reduce the distance to the truth and therefore the error. This fact will help us build generalized linear
models, later on in Chapter 10.
7.2.4. Estimating divergence. At this point in the chapter, dear reader, you may be won-
dering where the chapter is headed. At the start, the goal was to deal with overfitting and
underfitting. But now we’ve spent pages and pages on entropy and other fantasies. It’s as if
I promised you a day at the beach, but now you find yourself at a dark cabin in the woods,
wondering if this is a necessary detour or rather a sinister plot.
It is a necessary detour. The point of all the preceding material about information theory
and divergence is to establish both:
(1) How to measure the distance of a model from our target. Information theory gives
us the distance measure we need, the K-L divergence.
(2) How to estimate the divergence. Having identified the right measure of distance,
we now need a way to estimate it in real statistical modeling tasks.
Item (1) is accomplished. Item (2) remains for last. You’re going to see now that the diver-
gence leads to using a measure of model fit known as deviance.
To use DKL to compare models, it seems like we would have to know p, the target proba-
bility distribution. In all of the examples so far, I’ve just assumed that p is known. But when
we want to find a model q that is the best approximation to p, the “truth,” there is usually no
way to access p directly. We wouldn’t be doing statistical inference, if we already knew p.
But there’s an amazing way out of this predicament. It helps that we are only interested
in comparing the divergences of different candidates, say q and r. In that case, most of p just
subtracts out, because there is a E log(pi) term in the divergence of both q and r. This term
has no effect on the distance of q and r from one another. So while we don’t know where p is,
we can estimate how far apart q and r are, and which is closer to the target. It’s as if we can’t
tell how far any particular archer is from hitting the target, but we can tell which archer gets
closer and by how much.
