7.1. THE PROBLEM WITH PARAMETERS
205
Rethinking: Model fitting as compression. Another perspective on the absurd model just above is to
consider that model fitting can be considered a form of data compression. Parameters summarize
relationships among the data. These summaries compress the data into a simpler form, although
with loss of information (“lossy” compression) about the sample. The parameters can then be used
to generate new data, effectively decompressing the data.
When a model has a parameter to correspond to each datum, such as m7.6, then there is actually
no compression. The model just encodes the raw data in a different form, using parameters instead.
As a result, we learn nothing about the data from such a model. Learning about the data requires using
a simpler model that achieves some compression, but not too much. This view of model selection is
often known as Minimum Description Length (MDL).99
7.1.2. Too few parameters hurts, too. The overfit polynomial models manage to fit the data
extremely well, but they suffer for this within-sample accuracy by making nonsensical out-of-
sample predictions. In contrast, underfitting produces models that are inaccurate both
within and out of sample. They have learned too little, failing to recover regular features of
the sample.
Another way to conceptualize an underfit model is to notice that it is insensitive to the
sample. We could remove any one point from the sample and get pretty much the same
regression line. In contrast, the most complex model, m7.6, is very sensitive to the sample.
The predicted mean would change course a lot, if we removed any one point from the sample.
You can see the truth of this in Figure 7.4. In both plots in the figure what I’ve done is
drop each row of the data, one at a time, and re-derive the posterior distribution. On the
left, each line is a first-degree polynomial, m7.1, fit to one of the seven possible sets of data
constructed from dropping one row. The curves on the right are instead different fourth-
order polynomials, m7.4. Notice that the straight lines hardly vary, while the curves fly about
wildly. This is a general contrast between underfit and overfit models: sensitivity to the exact
composition of the sample used to fit the model.
Overthinking: Dropping rows. The calculations needed to produce Figure 7.4 are made easy by a
trick of R’s index notation. To drop a row i from a data frame d, just use:
R code
7.11
d_minus_i <- d[ -i , ]
This means drop the i-th row and keep all of the columns. Repeating the regression is then just a matter
of looping over the rows. Look inside the function brain_loo_plot in the rethinking package to
see how the figure was drawn and explore other models. There will be a loop near the end of the
function that does the hard work.
Rethinking: Bias and variance. The underfitting/overfitting dichotomy is often described as the
bias-variance trade-off.100 While not exactly the same distinction, the bias-variance trade-off
addresses the same problem. “Bias” is related to underfitting, while “variance” is related to overfitting.
These terms are confusing though, because they are used in many different ways in different contexts,
even within statistics. The term “bias” also sounds like a bad thing, even though increasing bias often
leads to better predictions. For these reasons, this book prefers underfitting/overfitting, but you should
expect to see similar examples discussed as bias/variance.
