9.2. METROPOLIS ALGORITHMS
275
A picture will help to make this clearer. Figure 9.3 shows an ordinary Metropolis al-
gorithm trying to explore a 2-dimensional posterior with a strong negative correlation of
−0.9. The region of high-probability parameter values forms a narrow valley. Focus on the
left hand plot for now. The chain starts in the upper-left of the valley. Filled points are ac-
cepted proposals. Open points are rejected proposals. Proposals are generated by adding
random Gaussian noise to each parameter, using a standard deviation of 0.01, the step size.
50 proposals are shown. The acceptance rate is only 60%, because when the valley is narrow
like this, proposals can easily fall outside it. But the chain does manage to move slowly down
the valley. It moves slow, because even when a proposal is accepted, it is still close to the
previous point.
What happens then if we increase the step size, for more distant proposals? Now look
on the right in Figure 9.3. Only 30% of proposals are accepted now. A bigger step size
means more silly proposals outside the valley. The accepted proposals do move faster along
the length of the valley, however. In practice, it is hard to win this tradeoff. Both Metropolis
and Gibbs get stuck like this, because their proposals don’t know enough about the global
shape of the posterior. They don’t know where they are going.
The high correlation example illustrates the problem. But the actual problem is more
severe and more interesting. Any Markov chain approachthat samples individual parameters
in individual steps is going to get stuck, once the number of parameters grows sufficiently
large. The reason goes by the name concentration of measure. This is an awkward
name for the amazing fact that most of the probability mass of a high-dimension distribution
is always very far from the mode of the distribution. It is hard to visualize. We can’t see in 100
dimensions, on most days. But if we think about the 2D and 3D versions, we can understand
the basic phenomenon. In two dimensions, a Gaussian distribution is a hill. The highest
point is in the middle, at the mode. But if we imagine this hill is filled with dirt—what else
are hills filled with?—then we can ask: Where is most of the dirt? As we move away from the
peak in any direction, the altitude declines, so there is less dirt directly under our feet. But in
the ring around the hill at the same distance, there is more dirt than there is at the peak. The
area increases as we move away from the peak, even though the height goes down. So the
total dirt, um probability, increases as we move away from the peak. Eventually the total dirt
(probability) declines again, as the hill slopes down to zero. So at some radial distance from
the peak, dirt (probability mass) is maximized. In three dimensions, it isn’t a hill, but now
a fuzzy sphere. The sphere is densest at the core, its “peak.” But again the volume increases
as we move away from the core. And so there is more total sphere-stuff in a shell around the
core.
Back to thinking of probability distributions, all of this means that the combination of
parameter values that maximizes posterior probability, the mode, is not actually in a region
of parameter values that are highly plausible. This means in turn that when we properly
sample from a high dimensional distribution, we won’t get any points near the mode. You
can demonstrate this for yourself very easily. Just sample randomly from a high-dimension
distribution—10 dimensions is enough—and plot the radial distances of the points. Here’s
some code to do this:
R code
9.4
D <- 10
T <- 1e3
Y <- rmvnorm(T,rep(0,D),diag(D))
rad_dist <- function( Y ) sqrt( sum(Y^2) )
