7.4. PREDICTING PREDICTIVE ACCURACY
225
with, the others. In such a case, you can of course compute WAIC as if each observation were
independent of the others, but it’s not clear what the resulting value means.
This caution raises a more general issue with all strategies to guess out-of-sample accu-
racy: Their validity depends upon the predictive task you have in mind. And not all predic-
tion can reasonably take the form that we’ve been assuming for the train-test simulations in
this chapter. When we consider multilevel models, this issue will arise again.
Rethinking: Information criteria and consistency. As mentioned previously, information criteria
like AIC and WAIC do not always assign the best expected Dtest to the “true” model. In statisti-
cal jargon, information criteria are not consistent for model identification. These criteria aim to
nominate the model that will produce the best predictions, as judged by out-of-sample deviance, so
it shouldn’t surprise us that they do not also do something that they aren’t designed to do. Other
metrics for model comparison are however consistent. So are information criteria broken?
They are not broken, if you care about prediction.117 Issues like consistency are nearly always
evaluated asymptotically. This means that we imagine the sample size N approaching infinity. Then
we ask how a procedure behaves in this large-data limit. With practically infinite data, AIC and WAIC
and cross-validation will always select the most complex model, so they are sometimes accused of
“overfitting.” But at the large-data limit, the most complex model will make predictions identical to
the true model (assuming it exists in the model set). The reason is that with so much data every
parameter can be very precisely estimated. And so using an overly complex model will not hurt
prediction. For example, as sample size N →∞the model with 5 parameters in Figure 7.8 will tell
you that the coefficients for predictors after the second are almost exactly zero. Therefore failing to
identify the “correct” model does not hurt us, at least not in this sense. Furthermore, in the natural
and social sciences the models under consideration are almost never the data-generating models. It
makes little sense to attempt to identify a “true” model.
Rethinking: What about BIC and Bayes factors? The Bayesian information criterion, abbre-
viated BIC and also known as the Schwarz criterion,118 is more commonly juxtaposed with AIC. The
choice between BIC or AIC (or neither!) is not about being Bayesian or not. There are both Bayesian
and non-Bayesian ways to motivate both, and depending upon how strict one wishes to be, neither
is Bayesian. BIC is related to the logarithm of the average likelihood of a linear model. The average
likelihood is the denominator in Bayes’ theorem, the likelihood averaged over the prior. There is a
venerable tradition in Bayesian inference of comparing average likelihoods as a means to comparing
models. A ratio of average likelihoods is called a Bayes factor. On the log scale, these ratios are
differences, and so comparing differences in average likelihoods resembles comparing differences in
information criteria. Since average likelihood is averaged over the prior, more parameters induce a
natural penalty on complexity. This helps guard against overfitting, even though the exact penalty is
not the same as with information criteria.
Many Bayesian statisticians dislike the Bayes factor approach,119 and all admit that there are
technical obstacles to its use. One problem is that computing average likelihood is hard. Even when
you can compute the posterior, you may not be able to estimate the average likelihood. Another
problem is that, even when priors are weak and have little influence on posterior distributions within
models, priors can have a huge impact on comparisons between models.
It’s important to realize, though, that the choice of Bayesian or not does not also decide between
information criteria or Bayes factors. Moreover, there’s no need to choose, really. We can always
use both and learn from the ways they agree and disagree. And both information criteria and Bayes
factors are purely predictive criteria that will happily select confounded models. They know nothing
about causation.
