374
11. GOD SPIKED THE INTEGERS
Distances are similarly positive real values, and both kinds of measurements are displace-
ments and can be modeled in very similar ways. The simplest distribution for displacements
is the exponential distribution, which is the maximum entropy distribution when all
we know about the values is their average displacement. So if our goal is just to estimate the
average rate of events, it’s the most conservative choice. The gamma distribution is also
commonly used. Gamma is maximum entropy for fixed mean value and fixed mean mag-
nitude (logarithm). See the Overthinking box further down for some generative models of
these distributions. There are lots of other options, as well, all of which allow for the rate of
events to vary with time. We’ll start with the exponential, to keep things easy.
One reason to keep the outcome distribution simple is that the tricky bit with survival
models is not the probability distribution we assign to the durations. Instead the tricky bit
is dealing with censoring. Censoring occurs when the event of interest does not occur in
the window of observation. This can happen most simply because observation ends before
the event occurred. For example, there are cats still waiting in the animal shelter. Many of
them will eventually be adopted. Another way censoring occurs is when some other event
happens that makes the event of interest impossible. For example, a cat could die of old age
while waiting to be adopted.
We can’t just toss out the censored individuals. Imagine a cohort of 100 cats who start
waiting for adoption at the same time. After one month, half of them have been adopted.
Now what is the rate of adoption? You can’t compute it using only the cats who have been
adopted. You need to also account for the cats who haven’t yet been adopted. The cats who
haven’t been adopted yet, but eventually will be adopted, clearly have longer waiting times
than the cats who have already been adopted. So the average rate among those who are
already adopted is biased upwards—it is confounded by conditioning on adoption.
It isn’t hard to include censored observations, but it does require a new type of model that
we haven’t seen yet in this book. The key idea is that the same distribution assumption for the
outcomes tells us both the probability of any observed duration that end in the event as well
as the probability that we would wait the observed duration without seeing the event. This
is an admittedly odd kind of creature. It might help to start out with a generative model—a
simulation—and try to build intuition for the statistical model. Then we’ll analyze an actual
sample of cat adoptions.
Overthinking: Generative models for exponential and gamma distributions. Like all maximum
entropy distributions, the exponential and gamma distributions arise from a class of generative pro-
cesses that preserve only some of the information about the underlying mechanics. You can simulate
an exponential by imagining a machine with N parts. Each of these parts has an equal chance of
breaking on any given day. If any part breaks, the whole machine stops working. What is the proba-
bility that the machine stops working after x days? Let’s compare a machine with 2 parts to a machine
with 5 parts:
R code
11.64
x2 <- replicate( 1e5 , min(runif( 2 , 1 , 100 )) )
x5 <- replicate( 1e5 , min(runif( 5 , 1 , 100 )) )
If you plot the densities of the x2 and x5 values, you’ll see the black and blue densities in the left plot
below. As the number of parts increases, the density converges to an exponential. You don’t need
very many. By N = 5, the blue density below, it is almost exactly exponential.
