378
11. GOD SPIKED THE INTEGERS
This is the same model. Using the built-in distributions has some speed advantages, so usually you
don’t want to do raw coding like this. But sometimes you need to, so it is worth understanding.
11.5. Summary
This chapter described some of the most common generalized linear models, those used
to model counts. It is important to never convert counts to proportions before analysis,
because doing so destroys information about sample size. A fundamental difficulty with
these models is that parameters are on a different scale, typically log-odds (for binomial)
or log-rate (for Poisson), than the outcome variable they describe. Therefore computing
implied predictions is even more important than before.
11.6. Practice
Easy.
11E1. If an event has probability 0.35, what are the log-odds of this event?
11E2. If an event has log-odds 3.2, what is the probability of this event?
11E3. Suppose that a coefficient in a logistic regression has value 1.7. What does this imply about
the proportional change in odds of the outcome?
11E4. Why do Poisson regressions sometimes require the use of an offset? Provide an example.
Medium.
11M1. As explained in the chapter, binomial data can be organized in aggregated and disaggregated
forms, without any impact on inference. But the likelihood of the data does change when the data are
converted between the two formats. Can you explain why?
11M2. If a coefficient in a Poisson regression has value 1.7, what does this imply about the change
in the outcome?
11M3. Explain why the logit link is appropriate for a binomial generalized linear model.
11M4. Explain why the log link is appropriate for a Poisson generalized linear model.
11M5. What would it imply to use a logit link for the mean of a Poisson generalized linear model?
Can you think of a real research problem for which this would make sense?
11M6. State the constraints for which the binomial and Poisson distributions have maximum en-
tropy. Are the constraints different at all for binomial and Poisson? Why or why not?
Hard.
11H1. Use quap to construct a quadratic approximate posterior distribution for the chimpanzee
model that includes a unique intercept for each actor, m10.4 (page ??). Compare the quadratic ap-
proximation to the posterior distribution produced instead from MCMC. Can you explain both the
differences and the similarities between the approximate and the MCMC distributions?
11H2. Use WAIC to compare the chimpanzee model that includes a unique intercept for each actor,
m11.4 (page ??), to the simpler models fit in the same section.
