10.1. MAXIMUM ENTROPY
319
numbers of each type of event are assumed to be constant, then the distribution that is most
consistent with these constraints is the binomial distribution. This distribution spreads prob-
ability out as evenly and conservatively as possible.
Second, of course usually we do not know the expected value, but wish to estimate it. But
this is actually the same problem, because assuming the distribution has a constant expected
value leads to the binomial distribution as well, but with unknown expected value np, which
must be estimated from the data. (You’ll learn how to do this in Chapter 11.) If only two
un-ordered outcomes are possible and you think the process generating them is invariant in
time—so that the expected value remains constant at each combination of predictor values—
then the distribution that is most conservative is the binomial. This is analogous to how the
Gaussian distribution is the most conservative distribution for a continuous outcome vari-
able with finite variance. Variables with different constraints get different maximum entropy
distributions, but the underlying principle remains the same.
Third, back in Chapter 2, we derived the binomial distribution just by counting how
many paths through the garden of forking data were consistent with our assumptions. For
each possible composition of the bag of marbles—which corresponds here to each possible
expected value—there is a unique number of ways to realize any possible sequence of data.
The likelihoods derived in that way turn out to be exactly the same as the likelihoods we get
by maximizing entropy. This is not a coincidence. Entropy counts up the number of different
ways a process can produce a particular result, according to our assumptions. The garden of
forking data did only the same thing—count up the numbers of ways a sequence could arise,
given assumptions.
Entropy maximization, like so much in probability theory, is really just counting. But
it’s abbreviated counting that allows us to generalize lessons learned in one context to new
problems in new contexts. Instead of having to tediously draw out a garden of forking data,
we can instead map constraints on an outcome to a probability distribution. There is no guar-
antee that this is the best probability distribution for the real problem you are analyzing. But
there is a guarantee that no other distribution more conservatively reflects your assumptions.
That’s not everything, but nor is it nothing. Any other distribution implies hidden con-
straints that are unknown to us, reflecting phantom assumptions. A full and honest account-
ing of assumptions is helpful, because it aids in understanding how a model misbehaves.
And since all models misbehave sometimes, it’s good to be able to anticipate those times
before they happen, as well as to learn from those times when they inevitably do.
Rethinking: Conditional independence. All this talk of constant expected value brings up an im-
portant question: Do these distributions necessarily assume that each observation is uncorrelated
with every other observation? Not really. What is usually meant by “independence” in a probability
distribution is just that each observation is uncorrelated with the others, once we know the corre-
sponding predictor values. This is usually known as conditional independence, the claim that
observations are independent after accounting for differences in predictors, through the model. It’s
a modeling assumption. What this assumption doesn’t cover is a situation in which an observed
event directly causes the next observed event. For example, if you buy the next Nick Cave album
because I buy the next Nick Cave album, then your behavior is not independent of mine, even after
conditioning on the fact that we both like that sort of music.
Overthinking: Binomial maximum entropy. The usual way to derive a maximum entropy distribu-
tion is to state the constraints and then use a mathematical device called the Lagrangian to solve for
