11.3. MULTINOMIAL AND CATEGORICAL MODELS
367
three categories, and the count that accumulates is across all three categories. So we end up
with a count of blue, white, and red marbles.
When more than two types of unordered events are possible, and the probability of each
type of event is constant across trials, then the maximum entropy distribution is the multi-
nomial distribution. You already met the multinomial, implicitly, in Chapter 10 when
we tossed pebbles into buckets as an introduction to maximum entropy. The binomial is
really a special case of this distribution. And so its distribution formula resembles the bino-
mial, just extrapolated out to three or more types of events. If there are K types of events
with probabilities p1, ..., pK, then the probability of observing y1, ..., yK events of each type
out of n total trials is:
Pr(y1, ..., yK|n, p1, ..., pK) =
n!
Q
i yi!
K
Y
i=1
pyi
i
The fraction with n! on top just expresses the number of different orderings that give the
same counts y1, ..., yK. It’s the famous multiplicity from the previous chapter.
A model built on a multinomial distribution may also be called a categorical regres-
sion, usually when each event is isolated on a single row, like with logistic regression. In
machine learning, this model type is sometimes known as the maximum entropy clas-
sifier. Building a generalized linear model from a multinomial likelihood is complicated,
because as the event types multiply, so too do your modeling choices. And there are two dif-
ferent approaches to constructing the likelihoods, as well. The first is based directly on the
multinomial likelihood and uses a generalization of the logit link. I’ll show you an example
of this approach, which I’ll call the explicit approach. The second approach transforms the
multinomial likelihood into a series of Poisson likelihoods, oddly enough. I’ll introduce that
approach after I introduce Poisson GLMs.
The conventional and natural link in this contextis the multinomiallogit, also known
as the softmax function. This link function takes a vector of scores, one for each of K event
types, and computes the probability of a particular type of event k as:
Pr(k|s1, s2, ..., sK) =
exp(sk)
PK
i=1 exp(si)
The rethinking package provides this link as the softmax function. Combined with this
conventional link, this type of GLM may be called multinomial logistic regression.
The biggest issue is what to do with the multiple linear models. In a binomial GLM, you
can pick either of the two possible events and build a single linear model for its log odds.
The other event is handled automatically. But in a multinomial (or categorical) GLM, you
need K −1 linear models for K types of events. One of the outcome values is chosen as a
“pivot” and the others are modeled relative to it. In each the K −1 linear models, you can
use any predictors and parameters you like—they don’t have to be the same, and there are
often good reasons for them to be different. In the special case of two types of events, none
of these choices arise, because there is only one linear model. And that’s why the binomial
GLM is so much easier.
There are two basic cases: (1) predictors have different values for different values the
outcome, and (2) parameters are distinct for each value of the outcome. The first case is
useful when each type of event has its own quantitative traits, and you want to estimate the
association between those traits and the probability each type of event appears in the data.
The second case is useful when you are interested instead in features of some entity that
