10.4. SUMMARY
329
the models you compare use the same outcome distribution type—Gaussian, binomial, expo-
nential, gamma, Poisson, or another. In that case, the constants subtract out when you com-
pare models by their differences. But if two models have different outcome distributions, the
constants don’t subtract out, and you can be misled by a difference in AIC/DIC/WAIC/LOO.
Really all you have to remember is to only compare models that all use the same type of
likelihood. Of course it is possible to compare models that use different likelihoods, just not
with information criteria. Luckily, the principle of maximum entropy ordinarily motivates
an easy choice of likelihood, at least for ordinary regression models. So there is no need to
lean on information criteria for this modeling choice.
There are a few nuances with WAIC/LOO and individual GLM types. These nuances
will arise as examples of each GLM are worked, in later chapters.
10.3. Maximum entropy priors
The principle of maximum entropy helps us to make modeling choices. When pressed
to choose an outcome distribution—a likelihood—maximum entropy nominates the least
informative distribution consistent with the constraints on the outcome variable. Applying
the principle in this way leads to many of the same distributional choices that are commonly
regarded as just convenient assumptions or useful conventions.
Another way that the principle of maximum entropy helps with choosing distributions
arises when choosing priors. GLMs are easy to use with conventional weakly informative
priors of the sort you’ve been using up to this point in the book. Such priors are nice, be-
cause they allow the data to dominate inference while also taming some of the pathologies
of unconstrained estimation. There were some striking examples of their “soft power” in
Chapter 9.
But sometimes, rarely, some of the parameters in a GLM refer to things we might actually
have background information about. When that’s true, maximum entropy provides a way to
generate a prior that embodies the background information, while assuming as little else as
possible. This makes them appealing, conservative choices.
We won’t be using maximum entropy to choose priors in this book, but when you come
across an analysis that does, you can interpret the principle in the same way as you do with
likelihoods and understand the approach as an attempt to include relevant background in-
formation about parameters, while introducing no other assumptions by accident.
10.4. Summary
This chapter has been a conceptual, not practical, introduction to maximum entropy
and generalized linear models. The principle of maximum entropy provides an empirically
successful way to choose likelihood functions. Information entropy is essentially a measure
of the number of ways a distribution can arise, according to stated assumptions. By choos-
ing the distribution with the biggest information entropy, we thereby choose a distribution
that obeys the constraints on outcome variables, without importing additional assumptions.
Generalized linear models arise naturally from this approach, as extensions of the linear mod-
els in previous chapters. The necessity of choosing a link function to bind the linear model
to the generalized outcome introduces new complexities in model specification, estimation,
and interpretation. You’ll become comfortable with these complexities through examples in
later chapters.
