11 God Spiked the Integers
The cold of space is named Kelvin, about 3 degrees Kelvin, or 3 degrees centigrade above
absolute zero. Kelvin is also the name of a river in Scotland, near Glasgow. The same river
gave its name to William Thomson, the Lord Kelvin (born 1824, died 1907), the first scientist
in the United Kingdom to be granted a noble title. Thomson studied thermodynamics in his
laboratory in Glasgow, and now the cold of space bears the name of a Scottish river.
Lord Kelvin befittingly also researched water. He invented several tide prediction en-
gines. These were essentially mechanical computers that calculated the tides (Figure 11.1).
All the gears and cables comprised a set of oscillators that produced accurate tide predic-
tions. But when you look at such a machine, most of it is internal states, not the predictions.
It would be quite hard to inspect any one of the gears at the bottom and know when to expect
the tide, because the predictions emerge from the combination of internal states.
Generalized linear models (GLMs) are a lot like these early mechanical computers.
The moving pieces within them, the parameters, interact to produce non-obvious predic-
tions. But we can’t read the parameters directly to understand the predictions. This is quite
different than the Gaussian linear models of previous chapters, where individual parameters
had clear meanings on the prediction scale. Mastering GLMs requires a little more attention.
They are always confusing, when you first try to grasp how they operate.
The most common and useful generalized linear models are models for counts. Counts
are non-negative integers—0, 1, 2, and so on. They are the basis of all mathematics, the first
bits that children learn. But they are also intoxicatingly complicated to model—hence the
apocryphal slogan that titles this chapter166. The essential problem is this: When what we
wish to predict is a count, the scale of the parameters is never the same as the scale of the
outcome. A count golem, like a tide prediction engine, has a whirring machinery underneath
that doesn’t resemble the output. Keeping the tide engine in mind, you can master these
models and use them responsibly.
We will engineer complete examples of the two most common types of count model. Bi-
nomial regression is the name we’ll use for a family of related procedures that all model
a binary classification—alive/dead, accept/reject, left/right—for which the total of both cat-
egories is known. This is like the marble and globe tossing examples from Chapter 2. But
now you get to incorporate predictor variables. Poisson regression is a GLM that models
a count with an unknown maximum—number of elephants in Kenya, number of applica-
tions to a PhD program, number of significance tests in an issue of Psychological Science. As
described in Chapter 10, the Poisson model is a special case of binomial. At the end, the
chapter describes some other count regressions.
331
