11.2. POISSON REGRESSION
353
from it, we would stumble into the issue of assuming that the acceptance rate for one of the
genders is pre-data more uncertain than the other. This isn’t to say that over-parameterizing
a model is always a good idea. But it isn’t a violation of any statistical principle. You can
always convert the posterior, post sampling, to any alternative parameterization. The only
limitation is whether the algorithm we use to approximate the posterior can handle the high
correlations. In this case, it can, and I bumped up the number iterations to make sure.
Rethinking: Simpson’sparadox isnota paradox. This empirical example is a famous one in statistical
teaching. It is often used to illustrate a phenomenon known as Simpson’s paradox.169 Like most
paradoxes, there is no violation of logic, just of intuition. And since different people have different
intuition, Simpson’s paradox means different things to different people. The poor intuition being
violated in this case is that a positive association in the entire population should also hold within
each department. Overall, females in these data did have a harder time getting admitted to graduate
school. But that arose because females applied to the hardest departments for anyone, male or female,
to gain admission to.
Perhaps a little more paradoxical is that this phenomenon can repeat itself indefinitely within
a sample. Any association between an outcome and a predictor can be nullified or reversed when
another predictor is added to the model. And the reversal can reveal a true causal influence or rather
just be a confound, as occurred in the grandparents example in Chapter 6. All that we can do about
this is to remain skeptical of models and try to imagine ways they might be deceiving us. Thinking
causally about these settings usually helps.170
11.2. Poisson regression
Binomial GLMs are appropriate when the outcome is a count from zero to some known
upper bound. If you can analogize the data to the globe tossing model, then you should
use a binomial GLM. But often the upper bound isn’t know. Instead the counts never get
close to any upper limit. For example, if we go fishing and return with 17 fish, what was the
theoretical maximum? Whatever it is, it isn’t in our data. How do we model the fish counts?
It turns out that the binomial model works here, provided we squint at it the right way.
When a binomial distribution has a very small probability of an event p and a very large num-
ber of trials N, then it takes on a special shape. The expected value of a binomial distribution
is just Np, and its variance is Np(1 −p). But when N is very large and p is very small, then
these are approximately the same.
For example, suppose you own a monastery that is in the business, like many monas-
teries before the invention of the printing press, of copying manuscripts. You employ 1000
monks, and on any particular day about 1 of them finishes a manuscript. Since the monks
are working independently of one another, and manuscripts vary in length, some days pro-
duce 3 or more manuscripts, and many days produce none. Since this is a binomial process,
you can calculate the variance across days as Np(1−p) = 1000(0.001)(1−0.001) ≈1. You
can simulate this, for example over 10,000 (1e5) days:
R code
11.35
y <- rbinom(1e5,1000,1/1000)
c( mean(y) , var(y) )
[1] 0.9968400 0.9928199
The mean and the variance are nearly identical. This is a special shape of the binomial. This
special shape is known as the Poisson distribution, and it is useful because it allows us to
