294
9. MARKOV CHAIN MONTE CARLO
Second, what do you want to know? If all you want are posterior means, it doesn’t take
many samples at all to get very good estimates. Even a couple hundred samples will do. But
if you care about the exact shape in the extreme tails of the posterior, the 99th percentile or
so, then you’ll need many more. So there is no universally useful number of samples to aim
for. In most typical regression applications, you can get a very good estimate of the posterior
mean with as few as 200 effective samples. And if the posterior is approximately Gaussian,
then all you need in addition is a good estimate of the variance, which can be had with one
order of magnitude more, in most cases. For highly skewed posteriors, you’ll have to think
more about which region of the distribution interests you. Stan will sometimes warn you
about “tail ESS,” which means the effective sample size in the tails of the posterior. In those
cases, it is nervous about the quality of extreme intervals, like 95%. Sampling more usually
helps.
The warmup setting is more subtle. On the one hand, you want to have the shortest
warmup period necessary, so you can get on with real sampling. But on the other hand, more
warmup can mean more efficient sampling. With Stan models, typically you can devote as
much as half of your total samples, the iter value, to warmup and come out very well. But
for simple models like those you’ve fit so far, much less warmup is really needed. Models
can vary a lot in the shape of their posterior distributions, so again there is no universally
best answer. But if you are having trouble, you might try increasing the warmup. If not, you
might try reducing it. There’s a practice problem at the end of the chapter that guides you in
experimenting with the amount of warmup.
Rethinking: Warmup is not burn-in. Other MCMC algorithms and software often discuss burn-
in. With a sampling strategy like ordinary Metropolis, it is conventional and useful to trim off the
front of the chain, the “burn-in” phase. This is done because it is unlikely that the chain has reached
stationarity within the first few samples. Trimming off the front of the chain hopefully removes any
influence of which starting value you chose for a parameter.149
But Stan’s sampling algorithms use a different approach. What Stan does during warmup is quite
different from what it does after warmup. The warmup samples are used to adapt sampling, to find
good values for the step size and the number of steps. Warmup samples are not representative of
the target posterior distribution, no matter how long warmup continues. They are not burning in,
but rather more like cycling the motor to heat things up and get ready for sampling. When real
sampling begins, the samples will be immediately from the target distribution, assuming adaptation
was successful.
9.5.2. How many chains do you need? It is very common to run more than one Markov
chain, when estimating a single model. To do this with ulam or stan itself, the chains
argument specifies the number of independent Markov chains to sample from. And the
optional cores argument lets you distribute the chains across different processors, so they
can run simultaneously, rather than sequentially. All of the non-warmup samples from each
chain will be automatically combined in the resulting inferences.
So the question naturally arises: How many chains do we need? There are three answers
to this question. First, when initially debugging a model, use a single chain. There are some
error messages that don’t display unless you use only one chain. The chain will fail with
more than one chain, but the reason may not be displayed. This is why the ulam default is
chains=1. Second, when deciding whether the chains are valid, you need more than one
chain. Third, when you begin the final run that you’ll make inferences from, you only really
