11.1. BINOMIAL REGRESSION
335
The output isn’t shown. There are many ways to construct new variables like this, including
mutant helper functions. But often all you need is a little arithmetic.
Now for our target model. Since this is an experiment, the structure tells us the model
relevant to inference. The model implied by the research question is, in mathematical form:
Li ∼Binomial(1, pi)
logit(pi) = αactor[i] + βtreatment[i]
αj ∼to be determined
βk ∼to be determined
Here L indicates the 0/1 variable pulled_left. Since the outcome counts are just 0 or 1,
you might see the same type of model defined using a Bernoulli distribution:
Li ∼Bernoulli(pi)
This is just another way of saying Binomial(1, pi). Either way, the model above implies 7
α parameters, one for each chimpanzee, and 4 treatment parameters, one for each unique
combination of the position of the prosocial option and the presence of a partner. In prin-
ciple, we could specify a model that allows every chimpanzee to have their own 4 unique
treatment parameters. If that sounds fun to you, I have good news. We’ll do exactly that, in
a later chapter.
I’ve left the priors above “to be determined.” Let’s determine them. I was trying to warm
you up for prior predictive simulation earlier in the book. Now with GLMs, it is really going
to pay off. Let’s consider a runt of a logistic regression, with just a single α parameter in the
linear model:
Li ∼Binomial(1, pi)
logit(pi) = α
α ∼Normal(0, ω)
We need to pick a value for ω. To emphasize the madness of conventional flat priors, let’s
start with something rather flat, like ω = 10.
R code
11.4
m11.1 <- quap(
alist(
pulled_left ~ dbinom( 1 , p ) ,
logit(p) <- a ,
a ~ dnorm( 0 , 10 )
) , data=d )
Now let’s sample from the prior:
R code
11.5
set.seed(1999)
prior <- extract.prior( m11.1 , n=1e4 )
One step remains. We need to convert the parameter to the outcome scale. This means
using the inverse-link function, as discussed in the previous chapter. In this case, the
link function is logit, so the inverse link is inv_logit.
