354
11. GOD SPIKED THE INTEGERS
model binomial events for which the number of trials N is unknown or uncountably large.
Suppose for example that you come to own, through imperial drama, another monastery.
You don’t know how many monks toil within it, but your advisors tell you that it produces,
on average, 2 manuscripts per day. With this information alone, you can infer the entire
distribution of numbers of manuscripts completed each day.
To build models with a Poisson distribution, the model form is even simpler than it is
for a binomial or Gaussian model. This simplicity arises from the Poisson’s having only one
parameter that describes its shape, resulting in a data probability definition like this:
yi ∼Poisson(λ)
The parameter λ is the expected value of the outcome y. It is also the expected variance of
the counts y.
We also need a link function. The conventional link function for a Poisson model is the
log link, as introduced in the previous chapter (page 326). So to embed a linear model, we
use:
yi ∼Poisson(λi)
log(λi) = α + β(xi −¯x)
The log link ensures that λi is always positive, which is required of the expected value of
a count outcome. But as mentioned in the previous chapter, it also implies an exponential
relationship between predictors and the expected value. Exponential relationships grow very
quickly, and few natural phenomena can remain exponential for long. So one thing to always
check with a log link is whether it makes sense at all ranges of the predictor variables. The
priors on the log scale also scale in surprising ways. So prior predictive simulation is again
helpful.
11.2.1. Example: Oceanic tool complexity. The island societies of Oceania provide a natu-
ral experiment in technological evolution. Different historical island populations possessed
tool kits of different size. These kits include fish hooks, axes, boats, hand plows, and many
other types of tools. A number of theories predict that larger populations will both develop
and sustain more complex tool kits. So the natural variation in population size induced by
natural variation in island size in Oceania provides a natural experiment to test these ideas.
It’s also suggested that contact rates among populations effectively increase population size,
as it’s relevant to technological evolution. So variation in contact rates among Oceanic soci-
eties is also relevant.
We’ll use this topic to develop a standard Poisson GLM analysis. And then I’ll pivot at
the end and also do a non-standard, but more theoretically motivated, Poisson model. The
data we’ll work with are counts of unique tool types for 10 historical Oceanic societies:171
R code
11.36
library(rethinking)
data(Kline)
d <- Kline
d
culture population contact total_tools mean_TU
1
Malekula
1100
low
13
3.2
2
Tikopia
1500
low
22
4.7
3
Santa Cruz
3600
low
24
4.0
4
Yap
4791
high
43
5.0
