350
11. GOD SPIKED THE INTEGERS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
case
admit
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Posterior validation check
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 11.5. Posterior validation for model m11.7. Blue points are ob-
served proportions admitted for each row in the data, with points from the
same department connected by a blue line. Open points, the tiny vertical
black lines within them, and the crosses are expected proportions, 89% in-
tervals of the expectation, and 89% interval of simulated samples, respec-
tively.
probability for both males and females from department A to department F. Females in these
data tended not to apply to departments like A and B, which had high overall admission rates.
Instead they applied in large numbers to departments like F, which admitted less than 10%
of applicants.
So while it is true overall that females had a lower probability of admission in these data,
it is clearly not true within most departments. And note that just inspecting the posterior
distribution alone would never have revealed that fact to us. We had to appeal to something
outside the fit model. In this case, it was a simple posterior validation check.
Instead of asking “What are the average probabilities of admission for females and males
across all departments?” we want to ask “What is the average difference in probability of admis-
sion between females and males within departments?” In order to ask the second question, we
estimate unique female and male admission rates in each department. Here’s a model that
asks this new question:
Ai ∼Binomial(Ni, pi)
logit(pi) = αgid[i] + δdept[i]
αj ∼Normal(0, 1.5)
δk ∼Normal(0, 1.5)
where dept indexes department in k = 1..6. So now each department k gets its own log-odds
of admission, δk, but the model still estimates universal adjustments—samein all departments—
for male and female applications.
Fitting this model is straightforward. We’ll use the indexing notation again to construct
an intercept for each department. But first, we also need to construct a numerical index that
