9.7. PRACTICE
303
9.6. Summary
This chapter has been an informal introduction to Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
estimation. The goal has been to introduce the purpose and approach MCMC algorithms.
The major algorithms introduced were the Metropolis, Gibbs sampling, and Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo algorithms. Each has its advantages and disadvantages. The ulam function in
the rethinking package was introduced. It uses the Stan (mc-stan.org) Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo engine to fit models as they are defined in this book. General advice about diagnosing
poor MCMC fits was introduced by the use of a couple of pathological examples. In the next
chapters, we use this new power to learn new kinds of models.
9.7. Practice
Easy.
9E1. Which of the following is a requirement of the simple Metropolis algorithm?
(1) The parameters must be discrete.
(2) The likelihood function must be Gaussian.
(3) The proposal distribution must be symmetric.
9E2. Gibbs sampling is more efficient than the Metropolis algorithm. How does it achieve this extra
efficiency? Are there any limitations to the Gibbs sampling strategy?
9E3. Which sort of parameters can Hamiltonian Monte Carlo not handle? Can you explain why?
9E4. Explain the difference between the effective number of samples, n_eff as calculated by Stan,
and the actual number of samples.
9E5. Which value should Rhat approach, when a chain is sampling the posterior distribution cor-
rectly?
9E6. Sketch a good trace plot for a Markov chain, one that is effectively sampling from the posterior
distribution. What is good about its shape? Then sketch a trace plot for a malfunctioning Markov
chain. What about its shape indicates malfunction?
Medium.
9M1. Re-estimate the terrain ruggedness model from the chapter, but now using a uniform prior and
an exponential prior for the standard deviation, sigma. The uniform prior should be dunif(0,10)
and the exponential should be dexp(1). Do the different priors have any detectible influence on the
posterior distribution?
9M2. The Cauchy and exponential priors from the terrain ruggedness model are very weak. They
can be made more informative by reducing their scale. Compare the dcauchy and dexp priors for
progressively smaller values of the scaling parameter. As these priors become stronger, how does each
influence the posterior distribution?
9M3. Re-estimate one of the Stan models from the chapter, but at different numbers of warmup it-
erations. Be sure to use the same number of sampling iterations in each case. Compare the n_eff
values. How much warmup is enough?
Hard.
