9.5. CARE AND FEEDING OF YOUR MARKOV CHAIN
299
To appreciate what has happened, take a look at the priors (dashed) and posteriors (blue)
in Figure 9.11. Both the Gaussian prior for α and the exponential prior for σ contain very
gradual downhill slopes. They are so gradual, that even with only two observations, as in
this example, the likelihood almost completely overcomes them. The mean of the prior for
α is 1, but the mean of the posterior is zero, just as the likelihood says it should be.
These weakly informative priors have helped by providing a very gentle nudge towards
reasonable values of the parameters. Now values like 30 million are no longer equally plau-
sible as small values like 1 or 2. Lots of problematic chains want subtle priors like these,
designed to tune estimation by assuming a tiny bit of prior information about each param-
eter. And even though the priors end up getting washed out right away—two observations
were enough here—they still have a big effect on inference, by allowing us to get an answer.
That answer is also a good answer. This point will be even more important for non-Gaussian
models to come.
Rethinking: The folk theorem of statistical computing. The example above illustrates something
known as the folk theorem of statistical computing: When you have computational prob-
lems, often there’s a problem with your model.151 Before we begin to tune the software and pour
more computer power into a problem, it can be useful to go over the model specification again, and
the data itself, to make sure the problem isn’t in the pre-sampling stage. It’s very common when
working with Bayesian models that slow or clunky sampling is due to something as simple as having
entirely omitted one or more prior distributions.
Overthinking: Divergent transitions are your friend. You’ll see divergent transition warnings
often in using ulam and Stan. They are your friend, providing a helpful warning. These warnings
arise when the numerical simulation that HMC uses is inaccurate. HMC can detect these inaccu-
racies. That is one of its major advantages over other sampling approaches, most of which provide
few automatic ways to discover bad chains. We’ll examine these divergent transitions in much more
detail in a later chapter. We’ll also see some clever ways to work around them.
9.5.4. Non-identifiable parameters. Back in Chapter 5, you met the problem of highly cor-
related predictors and the non-identifiable parameters they can create. Here you’ll see what
such parameters look like inside of a Markov chain. You’ll also see how you can identify
them, in principle, by using a little prior information. Most importantly, the badly behaving
chains produced in this example will exhibit characteristic bad behavior, so when you see
the same pattern in your own models, you’ll have a hunch about the cause.
To construct a non-identifiable model, we first simulate 100 observations from a Gauss-
ian distribution with mean zero and standard deviation 1.
R code
9.25
set.seed(41)
y <- rnorm( 100 , mean=0 , sd=1 )
