12 Monsters and Mixtures
In Hawaiian legend, Nanaue was the son of a shark who fell in love with a human women.
He grew into a murderous man with a shark mouth in the middle of his back. In Greek
legend, the minotaur was a man with the head of a bull. He was the spawn of a human
woman and a great white bull. The gryphon is a legendary monster that is part eagle and
part lion. Maori legends speak of Taniwha, monsters with features of serpents and birds and
even sharks, much like the dragons of Chinese and European mythology.
By piecing together parts of different creatures, it’s easy to make a monster. Many mon-
sters are hybrids. Many statistical models are too. This chapter is about constructing likeli-
hood and link functions by piecing together the simpler components of previous chapters.
Like legendary monsters, these hybrid likelihoods contain pieces of other model types. En-
dowed with some properties of each piece, they help us model outcome variables with in-
convenient, but common, properties. Being monsters, these models are both powerful and
dangerous. They are often harder to estimate and to understand. But with some knowledge
and caution, they are important tools.
We’ll consider three common and useful examples. The first are models for handling
over-dispersion. These models extend the binomial and Poisson models of the previous
chapter to cope a bit with unmeasured sources of variation. The second type is a family of
zero-inflated and zero-augmented models, each of which mixes a binary event with
an ordinary GLM likelihood like a Poisson or binomial. The third type is the ordered
categorical model, useful for categorical outcomes with a fixed ordering. This model is
built by merging a categorical likelihood function with a special kind of link function, usually
a cumulative link. We’ll also learn how to construct ordered categorical predictors.
These model types help us transform our modeling to cope with the inconvenient real-
ities of measurement, rather than transforming measurements to cope with the constraints
of our models. There are lots of other model types that arise for this purpose and in this way,
by mixing bits of simpler models together. We can’t possibly cover them all. But when you
encounter a new type, at least you’ll have a framework in which to understand it. And if you
ever need to construct your own unique monster, feel free to do so. Just be sure to validate it
by simulating dummy data and then recovering the data-generating process through fitting
the model to the dummy data.
12.1. Over-dispersed counts
In an earlier chapter (Chapter 7), I argued that models based on normal distributions
can be overly sensitive to extreme observations. The problem isn’t necessary that “outliers”
are bad data. Rather processes are often variable mixtures and this results in thicker tails.
381
