10.2. GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS
321
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
x
probability
Figure 10.5. Why we need link functions.
The solid blue line is a linear model of a prob-
ability mass. It increases linearly with a pre-
dictor, x, on the horizontal axis. But when it
reaches the maximum probability mass of 1, at
the dashed boundary, it will happily continue
upwards, as shown by the dashed blue line. In
reality, further increases in x could not further
increase probability, as indicated by the hori-
zontal continuation of the solid trend.
Luckily, it’s easy to do better. By using all of our prior knowledge about the outcome
variable, usually in the form of constraints on the possible values it can take, we can appeal
to maximum entropy for the choice of distribution. Then all we have to do is generalize the
linear regression strategy—replace a parameter describing the shape of the likelihood with a
linear model—to probability distributions other than the Gaussian.
This is the essence of a generalized linear model.162 And it results in models that
look like this:
yi ∼Binomial(n, pi)
f (pi) = α + β(xi −¯x)
There are only two changes here from the familiar Gaussian model. The first is principled—
the principle of maximum entropy. The second is an epicycle—a modeling trick that works
descriptively but not causally—but a quite successful one. I’ll briefly explain each, before
moving on in the remainder of the section to describe all of the most common distributions
used to construct generalized linear models. Later chapters show you how to implement
them.
First, the likelihood is binomial instead of Gaussian. For a count outcome y for which
each observation arises from n trials and with constant expected value np, the binomial dis-
tribution has maximum entropy. So it’s the least informative distribution that satisfies our
prior knowledge of the outcomes y. If the outcome variable had different constraints, it could
be a different maximum entropy distribution.
Second, there is now a funny little f at the start of the second line of the model. This
represents a link function, to be determined separately from the choice of distribution.
Generalized linear models need a link function, because rarely is there a “µ”, a parameter
describing the average outcome, and rarely are parameters unbounded in both directions,
like µ is. For example, the shape of the binomial distribution is determined, like the Gaussian,
by two parameters. But unlike the Gaussian, neither of these parameters is the mean. Instead,
the mean outcome is np, which is a function of both parameters. Since n is usually known
(but not always), it is most common to attach a linear model to the unknown part, p. But p is
a probability mass, so pi must lie between zero and one. But there’s nothing to stop the linear
model α + βxi from falling below zero or exceeding one. Figure 10.5 plots an example.
