9.5. CARE AND FEEDING OF YOUR MARKOV CHAIN
293
Finally, the model block is where the action is. This block computes the log-probability of the
data. It runs from top to bottom, like R code does, adding mathematical terms to the log-probability.
So when Stan sees sigma ~ exponential( 1 ), it doesn’t do any sampling at that moment. Instead,
it adds a probability term to the log-probability. This term is just dexp( sigma , 1 ). The same
goes for the other lines with ~ in them. Note that the last line, for log_gdp_std, is vectorized just
like R code. There are 170 outcomes values and 170 corresponding mu values. That last statement
processes all of them.
Stan then uses the analytical gradient—derivative—of all these terms to define the physics simula-
tion under Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. How does Stan do this? It uses a technique called automatic
differentiation, or simply “autodiff,” to build an analytical gradient. If you know much about ma-
chine learning, you may have also heard about backpropagation. It’s the same thing as autodiff.
This is much more accurate than a gradient approximated numerically. If you know some calculus,
really all that is going on is ruthless application of the chain rule. But the algorithm is actually quite
clever. See the Stan manual for more details.
That’s all there is to a Stan program, in the basic case. I’ll break out into boxes like this in later
chapters, to show more of the raw Stan code. Tools like ulam are bridges. They can do a lot of useful
work, but the extra control you get from working directly in Stan is worthwhile. Especially since it
won’t tie you to R or any other specific scripting language.
9.5. Care and feeding of your Markov chain
Markov chain Monte Carlo is a highly technical and usually automated procedure. You
might write your own MCMC code, for the sake of learning. But it is very easy to introduce
subtle biases. A package like Stan, in contrast, is continuously tested against expected output.
Most people who use Stan don’t really understand what it is doing, under the hood. That’s
okay. Science requires division of labor, and if every one of us had to write our own Markov
chains from scratch, a lot less research would get done in the aggregate.
But as with many technical and powerful procedures, it’s natural to feel uneasy about
MCMC and maybe even a little superstitious. Something magical is happening inside the
computer, and unless we make the right sacrifices and say the right words, an ancient evil
might awake. So we do need to understand enough to know when the evil stirs. The good
news is that HMC, unlike Gibbs sampling and ordinary Metropolis, makes it easy to tell
when the magic goes wrong. Its best feature is not how efficient it is. Rather the best feature
is that it complains loudly when things aren’t right. Let’s look at some complaints and along
the way establish some guidelines for running chains.
9.5.1. How many samples do you need? You can control the number of samples from the
chain by using the iter and warmup parameters. The defaults are 1000 for iter and warmup
is set to iter/2, which gives you 500 warmup samples and 500 real samples to use for infer-
ence. But these defaults are just meant to get you started, to make sure the chain gets started
okay. Then you can decide on other values for iter and warmup.
So how many samples do we need for accurate inference about the posterior distribu-
tion? It depends. First, what really matters is the effective number of samples, not the raw
number. The effective number of samples is an estimate of the number of independent sam-
ples from the posterior distribution. Markov chains are typically autocorrelated, so that se-
quential samples are not entirely independent. This reduces the effective number of samples.
As you saw earlier in the chapter, Stan provides an estimate of effective number of samples as
n_eff. It is only an estimate, but it is usually better to use it than the raw number of samples.
