11.1. BINOMIAL REGRESSION
333
(1) Logistic regression is the common name when the data are organized into
single-trial cases, such that the outcome variable can only take values 0 and 1.
(2) When individual trials with the same covariate values are instead aggregated to-
gether, it is common to speak of an aggregated binomial regression. In this
case, the outcome can take the value zero or any positive integer up to n, the num-
ber of trials.
Both flavors use the same logit link function (page 324), so both may sometimes be called
“logistic” regression, as the inverse of the logit function is the logistic. Either form of bi-
nomial regression can be converted into the other by aggregating (logistic to aggregated) or
exploding (aggregated to logistic) the outcome variable. We’ll fully work an example of each.
Like other GLMs, binomial regression is never guaranteed to produce a nice multivari-
ate Gaussian posterior distribution. So quadratic approximation is not always satisfactory.
We’ll work some examples using quap, but we’ll also check the inferences against MCMC
sampling, using ulam. The reason to do it both ways is so you can get a sense of both how
often quadratic approximation works, even when in principle it should not, and why it fails
in particular contexts. This is useful, because even if you never use quadratic approximation
again, your Frequentist colleagues use it all the time, and you might want to be skeptical of
their estimates.
11.1.1. Logistic regression: Prosocial chimpanzees. The data for this example come from
an experiment167 aimed at evaluating the prosocial tendencies of chimpanzees (Pan troglo-
dytes). The experimental structure mimics many common experiments conducted on hu-
man students (Homo sapiens studiensis) by economists and psychologists. A focal chim-
panzee sits at one end of a long table with two levers, one on the left and one on the right in
Figure 11.2. On the table are four dishes which may contain desirable food items. The two
dishes on the right side of the table are attached by a mechanism to the right-hand lever. The
two dishes on the left side are similarly attached to the left-hand lever.
When either the left or right lever is pulled by the focal animal, the two dishes on the
same side slide towards opposite ends of the table. This delivers whatever is in those dishes
to the opposite ends. In all experimental trials, both dishes on the focal animal’s side contain
food items. But only one of the dishes on the other side of the table contains a food item.
Therefore while both levers deliver food to the focal animal, only one of the levers delivers
food to the other side of the table.
There are two experimental conditions. In the partner condition, another chimpanzee
is seated at the opposite end of the table, as pictured in Figure 11.2. In the control condi-
tion, the other side of the table is empty. Finally, two counterbalancing treatments alternate
which side, left or right, has a food item for the other side of the table. This helps detect any
handedness preferences for individual focal animals.
When human students participate in an experiment like this, they nearly always choose
the lever linked to two pieces of food, the prosocial option, but only when another student
sits on the opposite side of the table. The motivating question is whether a focal chimpanzee
behaves similarly, choosing the prosocial option more often when another animal is present.
In terms of linear models, we want to estimate the interaction between condition (presence
or absence of another animal) and option (which side is prosocial).
Load the data from the rethinking package:
