10.2. GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS
325
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
-4
-2
0
2
4
x
log-odds
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
x
0.0
0.5
1.0
probability
Figure 10.7. The logit link transforms a linear model (left) into a proba-
bility (right). This transformation compresses the geometry far from zero,
such that a unit change on the linear scale (left) means less and less change
on the probability scale (right).
So to figure out the definition of pi implied here, just do a little algebra and solve the above
equation for pi:
pi =
exp(α + βxi)
1 + exp(α + βxi)
The above function is usually called the logistic. In this context, it is also commonly called
the inverse-logit, because it inverts the logit transform.
What all of this means is that when you use a logit link for a parameter, you are defining
the parameter’s value to be the logistic transform of the linear model. Figure 10.7 illustrates
the transformation that takes place when using a logit link. On the left, the geometry of the
linear model is shown, with horizontal lines indicating unit changes in the value of the lin-
ear model as the value of a predictor x changes. This is the log-odds space, which extends
continuously in both positive and negative directions. On the right, the linear space is trans-
formed and is now constrained entirely between zero and one. The horizontal lines have
been compressed near the boundaries, in order to make the linear space fit within the proba-
bility space. This compression produces the characteristic logistic shape of the transformed
linear model shown in the right-hand plot.
This compression does affect interpretation of parameter estimates, because no longer
does a unit change in a predictor variable produce a constant change in the mean of the
outcome variable. Instead, a unit change in xi may produce a larger or smaller change in
the probability pi, depending upon how far from zero the log-odds are. For example, in
Figure 10.7, when x = 0 the linear model has a value of zero on the log-odds scale. A half-
unit increase in x results in about a 0.25 increase in probability. But each addition half-unit
will produce less and less of an increase in probability, until any increase is vanishingly small.
And if you think about it, a good model of probability needs to behave this way. When an
