11.2. POISSON REGRESSION
363
0
50000
150000
250000
20
30
40
50
60
70
population
total tools
low contact
high contact
Figure 11.10. Posterior predictions for the
scientific model of the Oceanic tool counts.
Compare to the right hand plot in Fig-
ure 11.9. Since this model forces the trends to
pass through the origin, as it must, its behavior
is more sensible, in addition to having param-
eters with meaning outside a linear model.
The simplest model assumes that innovation is proportional to population size with some di-
minishing returns (an elasticity). It also assumes that tool loss is proportional to the number
of tools, with no diminishing returns. If you recall the neutral evolution debate from Chap-
ter 1, this is a model of that type—the theoretical model is more elaborate than the statistical
model we’ll derive from it.
The Overthinking box below presents the mathematical version of this model and shows
you the code to build it in ulam. The model ends up in m11.11. Let’s call this the scientific
model and the previous m11.10 the geocentric model. Figure 11.10 shows the posterior
predictions for the scientific model, on the natural scale of population size. Comparing it
with the analogous plot in Figure 11.9, notice that the trend for high contact societies always
trends above the trend for low contact societies. Both trends always pass through the origin
now, as they must. The scientific model is still far from perfect. But it provides a better
foundation to learn from. The parameters have clearer meanings now. They aren’t just bits
of machinery in the bottom of a tide prediction engine.
You might ask how the scientific model compares to the geocentric model. The expected
accuracy out of sample, whether you use PSIS or WAIC, is a few points better than the geo-
centric model. It is still tugged around by Hawaii and Tonga. We’ll return to these data in a
later chapter and approach contact rate a different way, by taking account of how close these
societies are to one another.
Overthinking: Modeling tool innovation. Taking the verbal model in the main text above, we can
write that the change in the expected number of tools in one time step is:
∆T = αPβ −γT
where P is the population size, T is the number of tools, and α, β, and γ are parameters to be estimated.
To find an equilibrium number of tools T, just set ∆T = 0 and solve for T. This yields:
ˆT = αPβ
γ
We’re going to use this inside a Poisson model now. The noise around the outcome will still be Poisson,
because that is still the maximum entropy distribution in this context—total_tools is a count with
