11.6. PRACTICE
379
11H3. The data contained in library(MASS);data(eagles) are records of salmon pirating at-
tempts by Bald Eagles in Washington State. See ?eagles for details. While one eagle feeds, some-
times another will swoop in and try to steal the salmon from it. Call the feeding eagle the “victim” and
the thief the “pirate.” Use the available data to build a binomial GLM of successful pirating attempts.
(a) Consider the following model:
yi ∼Binomial(ni, pi)
log
pi
1 −pi
= α + βPPi + βVVi + βAAi
α ∼Normal(0, 1.5)
βP ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
βV ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
βA ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
where y is the number of successful attempts, n is the total number of attempts, P is a dummy variable
indicating whether or not the pirate had large body size, V is a dummy variable indicating whether
or not the victim had large body size, and finally A is a dummy variable indicating whether or not
the pirate was an adult. Fit the model above to the eagles data, using both quap and ulam. Is the
quadratic approximation okay?
(b) Now interpret the estimates. If the quadratic approximation turned out okay, then it’s okay
to use the quap estimates. Otherwise stick to ulam estimates. Then plot the posterior predictions.
Compute and display both (1) the predicted probability of success and its 89% interval for each row (i)
in the data, as well as (2) the predicted success count and its 89% interval. What different information
does each type of posterior prediction provide?
(c) Now try to improve the model. Consider an interaction between the pirate’s size and age
(immature or adult). Compare this model to the previous one, using WAIC. Interpret.
11H4. The data contained in data(salamanders) are counts of salamanders (Plethodon elongatus)
from 47 different 49-m2 plots in northern California.174 The column SALAMAN is the count in each
plot, and the columns PCTCOVER and FORESTAGE are percent of ground cover and age of trees in the
plot, respectively. You will model SALAMAN as a Poisson variable.
(a) Model the relationship between density and percent cover, using a log-link (same as the ex-
ample in the book and lecture). Use weakly informative priors of your choosing. Check the quadratic
approximation again, by comparing map to map2stan. Then plot the expected counts and their 89%
interval against percent cover. In which ways does the model do a good job? In which ways does it
do a bad job?
(b) Can you improve the model by using the other predictor, FORESTAGE? Try any models you
think useful. Can you explain why FORESTAGE helps or does not help with prediction?
