308
10. BIG ENTROPY AND THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL
Natural processes other than addition also tend to produce maximum entropy distributions.
But they are not Gaussian, because they retain different information about the underlying
process.
Third, regardless of why it works, it tends to work. Mathematical procedures are effective
even when we don’t understand them. There are no guarantees that any logic in the small
world (Chapter 2) will be useful in the large world. We use logic in science because it has a
strong record of effectiveness in addressing real world problems. This is the historical justi-
fication: The approach has solved difficult problems in the past. This is no guarantee that it
will work on your problem. But no approach can guarantee that.
This chapter serves as a conceptual introduction to generalized linear models and
the principle of maximum entropy. A generalized linear model (GLM) is much like the
linear regressions of previous chapters. It is a model that replaces a parameter of a likelihood
function with a linear model. But GLMs need not use Gaussian likelihoods. Any likelihood
function can be used, and linear models can be attached to any or all of the parameters that
describe its shape. The principle of maximum entropy helps us choose likelihood functions,
by providing a way to use stated assumptions about constraints on the outcome variable to
choose the likelihood function that is the most conservative distribution compatible with
the known constraints. Using this principle recovers all the most common likelihood func-
tions of many statistical approaches, Bayesian or not, while simultaneously providing a clear
rationale for choice among them.
The chapters to follow this one build computational skills for working with different
flavors of GLM. Chapter 11 addresses models for count variables. Chapter 12 explores more
complicated models, such as ordinal outcomes and mixtures. Portions of these chapters are
specialized by model type. So you can skip sections that don’t interest you at the moment.
The multilevel chapters, beginning with Chapter 13, make use of binomial count models,
however. So some familiarity with the material in Chapter 11 will be helpful.
Rethinking: Bayesian updating and maximum entropy. Another kind of probability distribution,
the posterior distribution deduced by Bayesian updating, is also a case of maximizing entropy. The
posterior distribution has the greatest entropy relative to the prior (the smallest cross entropy) among
all distributions consistent with the assumed constraints and the observed data.154 This fact won’t
change how you calculate. But it should provide a deeper appreciation of the fundamental connec-
tions between Bayesian inference and information theory. Notably, Bayesian updating is just like
maximum entropy in that it produces the least informative distribution that is still consistent with
our assumptions. Or you might say that the posterior distribution has the smallest divergence from
the prior that is possible while remaining consistent with the constraints and data.
10.1. Maximum entropy
In Chapter 6, you met the basics of information theory. In brief, we seek a measure of
uncertainty that satisfies three criteria: (1) the measure should be continuous; (2) it should
increase as the number of possible events increases; and (3) it should be additive. The result-
ing unique measure of the uncertainty of a probability distribution p with probabilities pi for
each possible event i turns out to be just the average log-probability:
H(p) = −
X
i
pi log pi
This function is known as information entropy.
