326
10. BIG ENTROPY AND THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
x
log measurement
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
x
0
2
4
6
8
10
original measurement
Figure 10.8. The log link transforms a linear model (left) into a strictly pos-
itive measurement (right). This transform results in an exponential scaling
of the linear model, with a unit change on the linear scale mapping onto
increasingly larger changes on the outcome scale.
event is almost guaranteed to happen, its probability cannot increase very much, no matter
how important the predictor may be.
You’ll find examples of this compression phenomenon in later chapters. The key lesson
for now is just that no regression coefficient, such as β, from a GLM ever produces a constant
change on the outcome scale. Recall that we defined interaction (Chapter 7) as a situation
in which the effect of a predictor depends upon the value of another predictor. Well now
every predictor essentially interacts with itself, because the impact of a change in a predictor
depends upon the value of the predictor before the change. More generally, every predic-
tor variable effectively interacts with every other predictor variable, whether you explicitly
model them as interactions or not. This fact makes the visualization of counter-factual pre-
dictions even more important for understanding what the model is telling you.
The second very common link function is the log link. This link function maps a
parameter that is defined over only positive real values onto a linear model. For example,
suppose we want to model the standard deviation σ of a Gaussian distribution so it is a
function of a predictor variable x. The parameter σ must be positive, because a standard
deviation cannot be negative nor can it be zero. The model might look like:
yi ∼Normal(µ, σi)
log(σi) = α + βxi
In this model, the mean µ is constant, but the standard deviation scales with the value xi.
A log link is both conventional and useful in this situation. It prevents σ from taking on a
negative value.
What the log link effectively assumes is that the parameter’s value is the exponentiation
of the linear model. Solving log(σi) = α + βxi for σi yields the inverse link:
σi = exp(α + βxi)
