9.5. CARE AND FEEDING OF YOUR MARKOV CHAIN
295
need one chain. But using more than one chain is fine, as well. It just doesn’t matter, once
you’re sure it’s working. I’ll briefly explain these answers.
The first time you try to sample from a chain, you might not be sure whether the chain is
working right. So of course you will check the trace plot or trank plot. Having more than one
chain during these checks helps to make sure that the Markov chains are all converging to the
same distribution. Sometimes, individual chains look like they’ve settled down to a stable
distribution, but if you run the chain again, it might settle down to a different distribution.
When you run multiple Markov chains, each with different starting positions, and see that all
of them end up in the same region of parameter space, it provides a check that the machine
is working correctly. Using 3 or 4 chains is often enough to reassure us that the sampling is
working properly.
But once you’ve verified that the sampling is working well, and you have a good idea of
how many warmup samples you need, it’s perfectly safe to just run one long chain. For ex-
ample, suppose we learn that we need 1000 warmup samples and about 9000 real samples in
total. Should we run one chain, with warmup=1000 and iter=10000, or rather 3 chains, with
warmup=1000 and iter=4000? It doesn’t really matter, in terms of inference. But it might
matter in efficiency, because the 3 chains duplicate warmup effect that just gets thrown away.
And since warmup is typically the slowest part of the chain, these extra warmup samples cost
a disproportionate amount of your computer’s time. On the other hand, if you run the chains
on different processor cores, then you might prefer 3 chains, because you can spread the load
and finish the whole job faster. My institute uses shared computing servers with 64 or more
available cores. We run a lot of parallel chains.
There are exotic situations in which all of the advice above must be modified. But for
typical regression models, you can live by the motto one short chain to debug, four chains for
verification and inference.
Things may still go wrong. One of the perks of using HMC and Stan is that when sam-
pling isn’t working right, it’s usually very obvious. As you’ll see in the sections to follow, bad
chains tend to have conspicuous behavior. Other methods of MCMC sampling, like Gibbs
sampling and ordinary Metropolis, aren’t so easy to diagnose.
Rethinking: Convergence diagnostics. The default diagnostic output from Stan includes two met-
rics, n_eff and Rhat. The first is a measure of the effective number of samples. The second is the
Gelman-Rubin convergence diagnostic, ˆR.150 When n_eff is much lower than the actual number of
iterations (minus warmup) of your chains, it means the chains are inefficient, but possibly still okay.
When Rhat is above 1.00, it usually indicates that the chain has not yet converged, and probably you
shouldn’t trust the samples. If you draw more iterations, it could be fine, or it could never converge.
See the Stan user manual for more details. It’s important however not to rely too much on these di-
agnostics. Like all heuristics, there are cases in which they provide poor advice. For example, Rhat
can reach 1.00 even for an invalid chain. So view it perhaps as a signal of danger, but never of safety.
For conventional models, these metrics typically work well.
9.5.3. Taming a wild chain. One common problem with some models is that there are
broad, flat regions of the posterior density. This happens most often, as you might guess,
when one uses flat priors. The problem this can generate is a wild, wandering Markov chain
that erratically samples extremely positive and extremely negative parameter values.
Let’s look at a simple example. The code below tries to estimate the mean and standard
deviation of the two Gaussian observations −1 and 1. But it uses totally flat priors.
