324
10. BIG ENTROPY AND THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL
exactly the same constraints. Its shape is described by a single parameter, the rate of events
λ. Poisson GLMs are detailed in the next chapter.
There are many other exponential family distributions, and many of them are useful.
But don’t worry that you need to memorize them all. You can pick up new distributions,
and the sorts of generative processes they correspond to, as needed. It’s also not important
that an outcome distribution be a member of the exponential family—if you think you have
good reasons to use some other distribution, then use it. But you should also check its per-
formance, just like you would any modeling assumption.
Rethinking: A likelihood is a prior. In traditional statistics, likelihood functions are “objective” and
prior distributions “subjective.” However, likelihoods are themselves prior probability distributions:
They are priors for the data, conditional on the parameters. And just like with other priors, there
is no correct likelihood. But there are better and worse likelihoods, depending upon the context.
Useful inference does not require that the data (or residuals) be actually distributed according to the
likelihood anymore than it requires the posterior distribution to be like the prior. The duality between
likelihoods and priors will become quite explicit in Chapter 15.
10.2.2. Linking linear models to distributions. To build a regression model from any of
the exponential family distributions is just a matter of attaching one or more linear mod-
els to one or more of the parameters that describe the distribution’s shape. But as hinted at
earlier, usually we require a link function to prevent mathematical accidents like nega-
tive distances or probability masses that exceed 1. So for any outcome distribution, say for
example the exotic “Zaphod” distribution,164 we write:
yi ∼Zaphod(θi, ϕ)
f (θi) = α + β(xi −¯x)
where f is a link function.
But what function should f be? A link function’s job is to map the linear space of a model
like α + β(xi −¯x) onto the non-linear space of a parameter like θ. So f is chosen with that
goal in mind. Most of the time, for most GLMs, you can use one of two exceedingly common
links, a logit link or a log link. Let’s introduce each, and you’ll work with both in later chapters.
The logit link maps a parameter that is defined as a probability mass, and therefore
constrained to lie between zero and one, onto a linear model that can take on any real value.
This link is extremely common when working with binomial GLMs. In the context of a
model definition, it looks like this:
yi ∼Binomial(n, pi)
logit(pi) = α + βxi
And the logit function itself is defined as the log-odds:
logit(pi) = log
pi
1 −pi
The “odds” of an event are just the probability it happens divided by the probability it does
not happen. So really all that is being stated here is:
log
pi
1 −pi
= α + βxi
