352
11. GOD SPIKED THE INTEGERS
female 0.12 0.04 0.65 0.47 0.67 0.48
These are the proportions of all applications in each department that are either male (top
row) or female (bottom row). Department A receives 88% of its applications from males.
Department E receives 33% from males. Now look back at the delta posterior means in the
precis output from m11.8. The departments with a larger proportion of female applicants
are also those with lower overall admissions rates.
Department is probably a confound, in the sense that it misleads us about the direct
causal effect. But it is not a confound, in the sense that it is probably a genuine causal path
through gender influences admission. Gender influences choice of department, and depart-
ment influences chance of admission. Controlling for department reveals a more plausible
direct causal influence of gender. In DAG form:
A
D
G
The variable G is gender, D is department, and A is acceptance. There is an indirect causal
path G →D →A from gender to acceptance. So to infer the direct effect G →A, we
need to condition on D and close the indirect path. Model m11.8 does that. If you inspect
postcheck(m11.8), you’ll see that the model lines up much better now with the variation
among departments. This is another example of a mediation analysis.
Don’t get too excited however that conditioning on department is sufficient to estimate
the direct causal effect of gender on admissions. What if there are unobserved confounds
influencing both department and admissions? Like this:
A
D
G
U
What could U be? How about academic ability. Ability could influence choice of department
and probability of admission. In that case, conditioning on department is conditioning on a
collider, and it opens a non-causal path between gender and admissions, G →D ←U →A.
I’ll ask you to explore some possibilities like this in the practice problems at the end.
As a final note, you might have noticed that model m11.8 is over-parameterized. We
don’t actually need one of the parameters, either a[1] or a[2]. Why? Because the indi-
vidual delta parameters can stand for the acceptance rate of one of the genders in each
department. Then we just need an average deviation across departments. If this were a non-
Bayesian model, it wouldn’t work. But this kind of model is perfectly fine for us. The standard
deviations are inflated, because there are many combinations of the a and delta parameters
that can match the data. If you look at pairs(m11.8), you’ll see high posterior correlations
among all of the parameters. But on the outcome scale, the predictions are much tighter, as
you can see if you invoke postcheck(m11.8). It’s all good.
Why might we want to over-parameterize the model? Because it makes it easier to as-
sign priors. If we made one of the genders baseline and measured the other as a deviation
