10 Big Entropy and the Generalized Linear Model
Most readers of this book will share the experience of fighting with tangled electrical
cords. Whether behind a desk or stuffed in a box, cords and cables tend toward tying them-
selves in knots. Why is this? There is of course real physics at work. But at a descriptive level,
the reason is entropy: There are vastly more ways for cords to end up in a knot than for them
to remain untied.153 So if I were to carefully lay a dozen cords in a box and then seal the box
and shake it, we should bet that at least some of the cords will be tangled together when I
again open the box. We don’t need to know anything about the physics of cords or knots.
We just have to bet on entropy. Events that can happen vastly more ways are more likely.
Exploiting entropy is not going to untie your cords. But it will help you solve some prob-
lems in choosing distributions. Statistical models force many choices upon us. Some of these
choices are distributions that represent uncertainty. We must choose, for each parameter,
a prior distribution. And we must choose a likelihood function, which serves as a distribu-
tion of data. There are conventional choices, such as wide Gaussian priors and the Gaussian
likelihood of linear regression. These conventional choices work unreasonably well in many
circumstances. But very often the conventional choices are not the best choices. Inference
can be more powerful when we use all of the information, and doing so usually requires
going beyond convention.
To go beyond convention, it helps to have some principles to guide choice. When an
engineer wants to make an unconventional bridge, engineering principles help guide choice.
When a researcher wants to build an unconventional model, entropy provides one useful
principle to guide choice of probability distributions: Bet on the distribution with the biggest
entropy. Why? There are three sorts of justifications.
First, the distribution with the biggest entropy is the widest and least informative distri-
bution. Choosing the distribution with the largest entropy means spreading probability as
evenly as possible, while still remaining consistent with anything we think we know about
a process. In the context of choosing a prior, it means choosing the least informative distri-
bution consistent with any partial scientific knowledge we have about a parameter. In the
context of choosing a likelihood, it means selecting the distribution we’d get by counting up
all the ways outcomes could arise, consistent with the constraints on the outcome variable.
In both cases, the resulting distribution embodies the least information while remaining true
to the information we’ve provided.
Second, nature tends to produce empirical distributions that have high entropy. Back in
Chapter 4, I introduced the Gaussian distribution by demonstrating how any process that
repeatedly adds together fluctuations will tend towards an empirical distribution with the
distinctive Gaussian shape. That shape is the one that contains no information about the
underlying process except its location and variance. As a result, it has maximum entropy.
307
