382
12. MONSTERS AND MIXTURES
Models that assume a thin tail, like a pure Gaussian model, can be easily excited. Using
something like a Student’s t instead can help produce better inferences and out-of-sample
predictions.
The same goes for count models. When counts arise from a mixture of different pro-
cesses, then there may be more variation—thicker tails—than a pure count model expects.
This can again lead to overly excited models. When counts are more variable than a pure
process, they exhibit over-dispersion. The variance of a variable is sometimes called its
dispersion. For a counting process like a binomial, the variance is a function of the same
parameters as the expected value. For example, the expected value of a binomial is Np and
its variance is Np(1 −p). When the observed variance exceeds this amount—after condi-
tioning on all the predictor variables—this implies that some omitted variable is producing
additional dispersion in the observed counts.
That isn’t necessarily bad. Such a model could still produce perfectly good inferences.
But ignoring over-dispersion can also lead to all of the same problems as ignoring any pre-
dictor variable. Heterogeneity in counts can be a confound, hiding effects of interest or
producing spurious inferences. So it’s worth trying grappling with over-dispersion. The best
solution would of course be to discover the omitted source of dispersion and include it in
the model. But even when no additional variables are available, it is possible to mitigate the
effects of over-dispersion. We’ll consider two common and useful strategies.
In this chapter, we’ll consider continuous mixture models in which a linear model
is attached not to the observations themselves but rather to a distribution of observations.
We’ll spend the rest of this section outlining this kind of model, using the common beta-
binomial and gamma-Poisson (negative-binomial) models of this type. These models were
mentioned at the end of the previous chapter, but now we’ll actually define them.
In the next chapters, we’ll see how to employ multilevel models that estimate both the
residuals of each observation and the distribution of those residuals. In practice, it is often
easier to use multilevel models (GLMMs, Chapter 13) in place of continuous mixtures. The
reason is that multilevel models are much more flexible. They can handle over-dispersion
and other kinds of heterogeneity at the same time.
12.1.1. Beta-binomial. A beta-binomial model assumes that each binomial count obser-
vation has its own probability of a success.175 The model estimates the distribution of proba-
bilities of success across cases, instead of a single probability of success. And predictor vari-
ables change the shape of this distribution, instead of directly determining the probability of
each success.
This will be easier to understand in thecontext of an example. Forexample, the UCBadmit
data that you met last chapter is quite over-dispersed, as long as we ignore department. This
is because the departments vary a lot in baseline admission rates. You’ve already seen that
ignoring this variation leads to an incorrect inference about applicant gender. Now let’s fit
a beta-binomial model, ignoring department, and see how it picks up on the variation that
arises from the omitted variable.
What a beta-binomial model of these data will assume is that each observed count on
each row of the data table has its own unique, unobserved probability of admission. These
probabilities of admission themselves have a common distribution. This distribution is de-
scribed using a beta distribution, which is a probability distribution for probabilities. Why
use a beta distribution? Because it makes the mathematics easy. When we use a beta, it is
mathematically possible to solve for a closed form likelihood function that averages over the
