322
10. BIG ENTROPY AND THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL
The link function f provides a solution to this common problem. This chapter will introduce
the two most common link functions. Then you’ll see how to use them in the chapters that
follow.
Rethinking: The scourge of Histomancy. One strategy for choosing an outcome distribution is to
plot the histogram of the outcome variable and, by gazing into its soul, decide what sort of distribution
function to use. Call this strategy Histomancy, the ancient art of divining likelihood functions from
empirical histograms. This sorcery is used, for example, when testing for normality before deciding
whether or not to use a non-parametric procedure. Histomancy is a false god, because even perfectly
good Gaussian variables may not look Gaussian when displayed as a histogram. Why? Because at
most what a Gaussian likelihood assumes is not that the aggregated data look Gaussian, but rather that
the residuals, after fitting the model, look Gaussian. So for example the combined histogram of male
and female body weights is certainly not Gaussian. But it is (approximately) a mixture of Gaussian
distributions. So after conditioning on sex, the residuals may be quite normal. Other times, people
decide not to use a Poisson model, because the variance of the aggregate outcome exceeds its mean
(see Chapter 11). But again, at most what a Poisson likelihood assumes is that the variance equals the
mean after conditioning on predictors. It may very well be that a Gaussian or Poisson likelihood is
a poor assumption in any particular context. But this can’t easily be decided via Histomancy. This is
why we need principles, whether maximum entropy or otherwise.
10.2.1. Meet the family. The most common distributions used in statistical modeling are
members of a family known as the exponential family. Every member of this family is
a maximum entropy distribution, for some set of constraints. And conveniently, just about
every other statistical modeling tradition employs the exact same distributions, even though
they arrive at them via justifications other than maximum entropy.
Figure 10.6 illustrates the representative shapes of the most common exponential fam-
ily distributions used in GLMs. The horizontal axis in each plot represents values of a vari-
able, and the vertical axis represents probability density (for the continuous distributions)
or probability mass (for the discrete distributions). For each distribution, the figure also
provides the notation (above each density plot) and the name of R’s corresponding built-in
distribution function (below each density plot). The gray arrows in Figure 10.6 indicate
some of the ways that these distributions are dynamically related to one another. These rela-
tionships arise from generative processes that can convert one distribution to another. You
do not need to know these relationships in order to successfully use these distributions in
your modeling. But the generative relationships do help to demystify these distributions, by
tying them to causation and measurement.
Two of these distributions, the Gaussian and binomial, are already familiar to you. To-
gether, they comprise the most commonly used outcome distributions in applied statistics,
through the procedures of linear regression (Chapter 4) and logistic regression (Chapter 11).
There are also three new distributions that deserve some commentary.
The exponential distribution (center) is constrained to be zero or positive. It is
a fundamental distribution of distance and duration, kinds of measurements that represent
displacement from some point of reference, either in time or space. If the probability of
an event is constant in time or across space, then the distribution of events tends towards
exponential. The exponential distribution has maximum entropy among all non-negative
continuous distributions with the same average displacement. Its shape is described by a
single parameter, the rate of events λ, or the average displacement λ−1. This distribution is
the core of survival and event history analysis, which is not covered in this book.
