11.2. POISSON REGRESSION
365
Since the logarithm of a ratio is the same as a difference of logarithms, we can also write:
log λi = log µi −log τi = α + βxi
These τ values are the “exposures.” So if different observations i have different exposures,
then this implies that the expected value on row i is given by:
log µi = log τi + α + βxi
When τi = 1, then log τi = 0 and we’re back where we started. But when the exposure varies
across cases, then τi does the important work of correctly scaling the expected number of
events for each case i. So you can model cases with different exposures just by writing a
model like:
yi ∼Poisson(µi)
log µi = log τi + α + βxi
where τ is a column in the data. So this is just like adding a predictor, the logarithm of the
exposure, without adding a parameter for it. There will be an example later in this section.
You can also put a parameter in front of log τi, which is one way to model the hypothesis that
the rate is not constant with time.
For the last Poisson example, we’ll look at a case where the exposure varies across obser-
vations. When the length of observation, area of sampling, or intensity of sampling varies,
the counts we observe also naturally vary. Since a Poisson distribution assumes that the rate
of events is constant in time (or space), it’s easy to handle this. All we need to do, as ex-
plained above, is to add the logarithm of the exposure to the linear model. The term we add
is typically called an offset.
We’ll simulate for this example, both to provide another example of dummy-data sim-
ulation as well as to ensure we get the right answer from the offset approach. Suppose,
as we did earlier, that you own a monastery. The data available to you about the rate at
which manuscripts are completed is totaled up each day. Suppose the true rate is λ = 1.5
manuscripts per day. We can simulate a month of daily counts:
R code
11.50
num_days <- 30
y <- rpois( num_days , 1.5 )
So now y holds 30 days of simulated counts of completed manuscripts.
Also suppose that your monastery is turning a tidy profit, so you are considering pur-
chasing another monastery. Before purchasing, you’d like to know how productive the new
monastery might be. Unfortunately, the current owners don’t keep daily records, so a head-
to-head comparison of the daily totals isn’t possible. Instead, the owners keep weekly totals.
Suppose the daily rate at the new monastery is actually λ = 0.5 manuscripts per day. To
simulate data on a weekly basis, we just multiply this average by 7, the exposure:
R code
11.51
num_weeks <- 4
y_new <- rpois( num_weeks , 0.5*7 )
And new y_new holds four weeks of counts of completed manuscripts.
To analyze both y, totaled up daily, and y_new, totaled up weekly, we just add the loga-
rithm of the exposure to linear model. First, let’s build a data frame to organize the counts
and help you see the exposure for each case:
