328
10. BIG ENTROPY AND THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL
Since x appears in this answer, the impact of a change in x depends upon x. That’s an interaction with
itself. The rate of change in the odds is a little nicer:
∂p/(1 −p)
∂x
= β exp(α + βx)
but it still contains the entire linear model. Sometimes people avoid non-linear models because
they don’t like having to interpret non-linear effects. But if the actual phenomenon contains non-
linearities, this solves only a small world problem.
10.2.3. Omitted variable bias again. Back in Chapters 5 and 6, you saw some examples of
omitted variable bias, where leaving a causally important variable out of a model leads
to biased inference. The same thing can of course happen in GLMs. But it can be worse in
GLMs, because even a variable that isn’t technically a confounder can bias inference, once
we have a link function. The reason is that the ceiling and floor effects described above can
distort estimates by suppressing the causal influence of a variable.
Suppose for example that two variables X and Z independently influence a binary out-
come Y. If either X and Z is large enough, then Y = 1. Both variables are sufficient causes
of Y. Now if we don’t measure Z but only X, we might consistently underestimate the causal
effect of X. Why? Because Z is sufficient for Y to equal 1, and we didn’t measure Z. So there
are cases in the data where X is small but Y = 1. These cases imply X does not influence Y
very strongly, but only because we are ignoring Z. This phenomenon doesn’t occur in ordi-
nary linear regression, because independent causes just contribute to the mean. There are
no ceiling or floor effects (in theory).
There is no avoiding this problem. Falling back on a linear, rather than generalized linear,
model won’t change the reality of omitted variable bias. It will just statistically disguise it.
That may be a good publication strategy, but it’s not a good inferential strategy.
10.2.4. Absolute and relative differences. There is an important practical consequence of
the way that a link function compresses and expands different portions of the linear model’s
range: Parameter estimates do not by themselves tell you the importance of a predictor on
the outcome. The reason is that each parameter represents a relative difference on the scale
of the linear model, ignoring other parameters, while we are really interested in absolute
differences in outcomes that must incorporate all parameters.
This point will come up again in the context of data examples in later chapters, when it
will be easier to illustrate its importance. For now, just keep in mind that a big beta-coefficient
may not correspond to a big effect on the outcome.
10.2.5. GLMs and information criteria. What you learned in Chapter 6 about information
criteria and regularizing priors applies also to GLMs. But with all these new outcome distri-
butions at your command, it is tempting to use information criteria to compare models with
different likelihood functions. Is a Gaussian or binomial better? Can’t we just let WAIC or
cross-validation sort it out?
Unfortunately, WAIC (or any other information criterion) cannot sort it out. The prob-
lem is that deviance is part normalizing constant. The constant affects the absolute magni-
tude of the deviance, but it doesn’t affect fit to data. Since information criteria are all based
on deviance, their magnitude also depends upon these constants. That is fine, as long as all of
