10.1. MAXIMUM ENTROPY
311
already extremely good, for just 10 pebbles. Information entropy is a way of counting how
many unique arrangements correspond to a distribution.
This is useful, because the distribution that can happen the greatest number of ways is the
most plausible distribution. Call this distribution the maximum entropy distribution.
As you might guess from the pebble example, the number of ways corresponding to the
maximum entropy distribution eclipses that of any other distribution. And the numbers of
ways for each distribution most similar to the maximum entropy distribution eclipse those
of less similar distributions. And so on, such that the vast majority of unique arrangements
of pebbles produce either the maximum entropy distribution or rather a distribution very
similar to it. And that is why it’s often effective to bet on maximum entropy: It’s the center
of gravity for the highly plausible distributions.
Its high plausibility is conditional on our assumptions, of course. To grasp the role
of assumptions—constraints and data—in maximum entropy, we’ll explore two examples.
First, we’ll derive the Gaussian distribution as the solution to an entropy maximization prob-
lem. Second, we’ll derive the binomial distribution, which we used way back in Chapter 2
to draw marbles and toss globes, as the solution to a different entropy maximization prob-
lem. These derivations will not be mathematically rigorous. Rather, they will be graphical
and aim to deliver a conceptual appreciation for what this thing called entropy is doing. The
Overthinking boxes in this section provide connections to the mathematics, for those who
are interested.
But the most important thing is to be patient with yourself. Understanding of and in-
tuition for probability theory comes with experience. You can usefully apply the principle
of maximum entropy before you fully understand it. Indeed, it may be that no one fully
understands it. Over time, and within the contexts that you find it useful, the principle will
become more intuitive.
Rethinking: What good is intuition? Like many aspects of information theory, maximum entropy
is not very intuitive. But note that intuition is just a guide to developing methods. When a method
works, it hardly matters whether our intuition agrees. This point is important, because some people
still debate statistical approaches on the basis of philosophical principles and intuitive appeal. Philos-
ophy does matter, because it influences development and application. But it is a poor way to judge
whether or not an approach is useful. Results are what matter. For example, the three criteria used to
derive information entropy, back in Chapter 6, are not also the justification for using information en-
tropy. The justification is rather that it has worked so well on so many problems where other methods
have failed.
Overthinking: The Wallis derivation. Intuitively, we can justify maximum entropy just based upon
the definition of information entropy. But there’s another derivation, attributed to Graham Wallis,155
that doesn’t invoke “information” at all. Here’s a short version of the argument. Suppose there are M
observable events, and we wish to assign a plausibility to each. We know some constraints about the
process that produces these events, such as its expected value or variance. Now imagine setting up M
buckets and tossing a large number N of individual stones into them at random, in such a way that
each stone is equally likely to land in any of the M buckets. After all the stones have landed, we count
up the number of stones in each bucket i and use these counts ni to construct a candidate probability
distribution defined by pi = ni/N. If this candidate distribution is consistent with our constraints, we
add it to a list. If not, we empty the buckets and try again. After many rounds of this, the distribution
that has occurred the most times is the fairest—in the sense that no bias was involved in tossing the
stones into buckets—that still obeys the constraints that we imposed.
