10.1. MAXIMUM ENTROPY
313
-4
-2
0
2
4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
value
Density
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
1.36
1.38
1.40
1.42
shape
entropy
Figure 10.2. Maximum entropy and the Gaussian distribution. Left: Com-
parison of Gaussian (blue) and several other continuous distributions with
the same variance. Right: Entropy is maximized when curvature of a gen-
eralized normal distribution matches the Gaussian, where shape is equal to
2.
those other distributions in nature? Because for every sequence of coin flips that can produce
such an imbalanced outcome, there are vastly many more that can produce an approximately
balanced outcome. The bell curve emerges, empirically, because there are so many different
detailed states of the physical system that can produce it. Whatever does happen, it’s bound
to produce an ensemble that is approximately Gaussian. So if all you know about a collection
of continuous values is its variance (or that it has a finite variance, even if you don’t know
it yet), the safest bet is that the collection ends up in one of these vastly many bell-shaped
configurations.158
And maximum entropy just seeks the distribution that can arise the largest number of
ways, so it does a good job of finding limiting distributions like this. But since entropy is
maximized when probability is spread out as evenly as possible, maximum entropy also seeks
the distribution that is most even, while still obeying its constraints. In order to visualize how
the Gaussian is the most even distribution for any given variance, let’s consider a family of
generalized distributions with equal variance. A generalized normal distribution is defined
by the probability density:
Pr(y|µ, α, β) =
β
2αΓ(1/β)e−
( |y−µ|
α
)β
We want to compare a regular Gaussian distribution with variance σ2 to several generalized
normals with the same variance.159
The left-hand plot in Figure 10.2 presents one Gaussian distribution, in blue, together
with three generalized normal distributions with the same variance. All four distributions
have variance σ2 = 1. Two of the generalized distributions are more peaked, and have
thicker tails, than the Gaussian. Probability has been redistributed from the middle to the
tails, keeping the variance constant. The third generalized distribution is instead thicker
