14.2. ADVANCED VARYING SLOPES
461
14.2. Advanced varying slopes
To see how to construct a model with more than two varying effects—varying intercepts
plus more than one varying slope—as well as with more than one type of cluster, we’ll return
to the chimpanzee experiment data that was introduced in Chapter 11. In these data, there
are two types of clusters: actors and blocks. We explored cross-classification with two
kinds of varying intercepts back on page 429. We also modeled the experiment with two
different slopes: one for the effect of the prosocial option (the side of the table with two
pieces of food) and one for the interaction between the prosocial option and the presence of
another chimpanzee. Now we’ll model both types of clusters and place varying effects on the
intercepts and both slopes. All of this machinery is not always necessary. But sometimes it
is, and this is a relatively simple example to lay it all out.
I’ll also use this example to emphasize the importance of non-centered parameteri-
zation for some multilevel models. For any given multilevel model, there are several differ-
ent ways to write it down. These ways are called “parameterizations.” Mathematically, these
alternative parameterizations are equivalent, but inside the MCMC engine they are not. Re-
member, how you fit the model is part of the model. Choosing a better parameterization
is an awesome way to improve sampling for your MCMC model fit, and the non-centered
parameterization tends to help a lot with complex varying effect models like the one you’ll
work with in this section. I’ll hide the details of the technique in the main text. But as usual,
there is an Overthinking box at the end that provides some detail.
Okay, let’s construct a cross-classified varying slopes model. To maintain some sanity
with this complicated model, we’ll use more than one linear model in the formulas. This will
allow us to compartmentalize sub-models for the intercepts and each slope. Here’s what the
likelihood and its linear model looks like:
Li ∼Binomial(1, pi)
logit(pi) = γtid[i] + αactor[i],tid[i] + βblock[i],tid[i]
The linear model for logit(pi) contains an average log-odds for each treatment, γtid[i], an
effect for each actor in each treatment, αactor[i],tid[i], and finally an effect for each block in
each treatment, βblock[i],tid[i]. This is essentially an interaction model that allows the effect of
each treatment to vary by each actor and each block. This is to say that the average treatment
effect can vary by block, and the each individual chimpanzee can also respond (across blocks)
to each treatment differently. This yields a total of 4+7×4+6×4 = 56 parameters. Pooling
is really needed here.
So let’s do some pooling. The next part of the model are the adaptive priors. Since
there are two cluster types, actors and blocks, there are two multivariate Gaussian priors.
The multivariate Gaussian priors are both 4-dimensional, in this example, because there are
4 treatments. But in general, you can choose to have different varying effects in different
