13.4. DIVERGENT TRANSITIONS AND NON-CENTERED PRIORS
435
13.4.1. The Devil’s Funnel. You don’t need a fancy model to experience divergent transi-
tions. Suppose we have this joint distribution of two variables, v and x:
v ∼Normal(0, 3)
x ∼Normal(0, exp(v))
There are no data here, just a joint distribution to sample from. This distribution might seem
weird, but it represents a typical multilevel distribution, in which the scale of one variable
(here x) depends upon another variable (here v). We’ll visualize it on the next page. You can
try this in ulam():
R code
13.26
m13.7 <- ulam(
alist(
v ~ normal(0,3),
x ~ normal(0,exp(v))
), data=list(N=1) , chains=4 )
precis( m13.7 )
mean
sd
5.5%
94.5% n_eff Rhat
v
1.90
2.08
-1.49
5.42
39 1.06
x 18.12 135.97 -31.78 123.84
102 1.04
This looks like an easy problem—only two parameters—but it’s a disaster. You should see
lots of divergent transitions. And the n_eff and Rhat values are very poor. Take a glance at
the trace plot, traceplot(m13.7), too.
This example is The Devil’s Funnel.192 In the left panel of Figure 13.5, I show the distri-
bution’s contours. At low values of v, the distribution of x contracts around zero. This forms
a very steep valley that the Hamiltonian particle needs to explore. Steep surfaces are hard to
simulate, because the simulation is not actually continuous. It happens in discrete steps. If
the steps are too big, the simulation will overshoot. This error effectively changes the total
energy in the system. What happens next is unpredictable.
As in the examples in Chapter 9, the simulation in Figure 13.5 (left panel) starts at the
×. The simulation finds the valley. But then it misses its turn and careens into space. The
open point is a divergent transition, a proposal for which the energy at the start of the transi-
tion is not the same as the energy at the end of the transition. When you try to sample from
this distribution, you get lots of these divergent transitions and a very unreliable approxima-
tion of the posterior distribution. We can prove that in this case, because it is a very simple
distribution that we can compute with grid approximation.
We can fix this problem by reparameterizing the funnel. There are two general ways
to parameterize models in which the distribution of one parameter is a function of another
parameter. In this example, the distribution of x is a function of v:
x ∼Normal(0, exp(v))
This is the source of the funnel: As v changes, the distribution of x changes in a very incon-
venient way. This parameterization is known as the centered parameterization. This
is not a very intuitive name. It just indicates that the distribution of x is conditional on one
or more other parameters.
The alternative is a non-centered parameterization. A non-centered parameter-
ization moves the embedded parameter, v in this case, out of the definition of the other
