414
13. MODELS WITH MEMORY
from the data. This means the robot tracks a parameter for each café as well as at least two
parameters to describe the population of cafés: an average and a standard deviation. As the
robot observes waiting times, it updates everything: the estimates for each café as well as the
estimates for the population. If the population seems highly variable, then the prior is flat
and uninformative and, as a consequence, the observations at any one café do very little to
the estimate at another. If instead the population seems to contain little variation, then the
prior is narrow and highly informative. An observation at any one café will have a big impact
on estimates at any other café.
In this chapter, you’ll see the formal version of this argument and how it leads us to mul-
tilevel models. These models remember features of each cluster in the data as they learn
about all of the clusters. Depending upon the variation among clusters, which is learned
from the data as well, the model pools information across clusters. This pooling tends to
improve estimates about each cluster. This improved estimation leads to several, more prag-
matic sounding, benefits of the multilevel approach. I mentioned them in Chapter 1. They
are worth repeating.
(1) Improved estimates for repeat sampling. When more than one observation arises
from the same individual, location, or time, then traditional, single-level models
either maximally underfit or overfit the data.
(2) Improved estimates for imbalance in sampling. When some individuals, locations,
or times are sampled more than others, multilevel models automatically cope with
differing uncertainty across these clusters. This prevents over-sampled clusters
from unfairly dominating inference.
(3) Estimates of variation. If our research questions include variation among individu-
als or other groups within the data, then multilevel models are a big help, because
they model variation explicitly.
(4) Avoid averaging, retain variation. Frequently, scholars pre-average some data to
construct variables. This can be dangerous, because averaging removes variation,
and there are also typically several different ways to perform the averaging. Aver-
aging therefore both manufactures false confidence and introduces arbitrary data
transformations. Multilevel models allow us to preserve the uncertainty and avoid
data transformations.
All of these benefits flow out of the same strategy and model structure. You learn one basic
design and you get all of this for free.
When it comes to regression, multilevel regression deserves to be the default approach.
There are certainly contexts in which it would be better to use an old-fashioned single-level
model. But the contexts in which multilevel models are superior are much more numer-
ous. It is better to begin to build a multilevel analysis, and then realize it’s unnecessary, than
to overlook it. And once you grasp the basic multilevel strategy, it becomes much easier
to incorporate related tricks such as allowing for measurement error in the data and even
modeling missing data itself (Chapter 15).
There are costs of the multilevel approach. The first is that we have to make some new
assumptions. We have to define the distributions from which the characteristics of the clus-
ters arise. Luckily, conservative maximum entropy distributions do an excellent job in this
context. Second, there are new estimation challenges that come with the full multilevel ap-
proach. These challenges lead us headfirst into MCMC estimation. Third, multilevel models
can be hard to understand, because they make predictions at different levels of the data. In
