388
12. MONSTERS AND MIXTURES
mixture, because every binomial count is assumed to have its own independent beta-distributed prob-
ability of success, and the beta distribution is continuous rather than discrete. So the parameters of
the beta-binomial are just the number of draws in each case (the same as the “size” n of the ordinary
binomial distribution) and the two parameters that describe the shape of the beta distribution. All of
this implies that the probability of observing a number of successes y from a beta-binomial process
is:
f (y|n, ¯p, θ) =
Z 1
0
g(y|n, p)h(p|¯p, θ)dp
where f is the beta-binomial density, g is the binomial distribution, and h is the beta density. The
integral above, like most integrals in applied probability, just computes an average: the probability
of y, averaged over all values of p. The p values are drawn from the beta distribution with mean ¯p
and scale θ. The probability of a success p is no longer a free parameter, as it is produced by the beta
distribution. The gamma-Poisson density has a similar form, but averaging a Poisson probability over
a gamma distribution of rates.
In the case of the beta-binomial, as well as the gamma-Poisson, it is possible to close the integral
above. You can look up the closed-form expressions anytime you need the analytic forms. The R
functions dbetabinom and dgampois provide computations from them.
12.2. Zero-inflated outcomes
Very often, the things we can measure are not emissions from any pure process. Instead,
they are mixtures of multiple processes. Whenever there are different causes for the same
observation, then a mixture model may be useful. A mixture model uses more than one
simple probability distribution to model a mixture of causes. In effect, these models use more
than one likelihood for the same outcome variable.
Count variables are especially prone to needing a mixture treatment. The reason is that a
count of zero can often arise more than one way. A “zero” means that nothing happened, and
nothing can happen either because the rate of events is low or rather because the process that
generates events failed to get started. If we are counting scrub jays in the woods, we might
record a zero because there were no scrub jays in the woods or rather because we scared
them all off before we starting looking. Either way, the data contains a zero.
So in this section you’ll see how to construct simple zero-inflated models. You’ll be able
to use the same components from earlier models, but they’ll be assembled in a different way.
So even if you never need to use or interpret a zero-inflated model, seeing how they are
constructed should expand your modeling imagination.
Rethinking: Breaking the law. In the sciences, there is sometimes a culture of anxiety surrounding
statistical inference. It used tobe thatresearchers couldn’t easilyconstruct andstudy theirown custom
models, because they had to rely upon statisticians to properly study the models first. This led to
concerns about unconventional models, concerns about breaking the laws of statistics. But statistical
computing is much more capable now. Now you can imagine your own generative process, simulate
data from it, write the model, and verify that it recovers the true parameter values. You don’t have to
wait for a mathematician to legalize the model you need.
12.2.1. Example: Zero-inflated Poisson. Back in Chapter 11, I introduced Poisson GLMs
by using the example of a monastery producing manuscripts. Each day, a large number of
monks finish copying a small number of manuscripts. The process is essentially binomial,
