404
12. MONSTERS AND MIXTURES
Now edu_new contains values from 1 to 8 in the right order of ascending education.
Now for the fun part. The notion with ordered predictor variables is that each step up in
value comes with its own incremental, or marginal, effect on the outcome. So that implies
we want to infer, using a parameter, each of those incremental effects. With 8 education
levels, we’ll need 7 parameters. The first level (Elementary School) will be absorbed into the
intercept. Then the first increment comes from moving from Elementary School to Middle
School. In that case we’ll add the first effect to the linear model:
ϕi = δ1 + other stuff
where the parameter δ1 is the effect of completing Middle School and “other stuff” is all of
the other terms you want in your linear model. Another individual goes on to finish the third
level, Some High School, and that individual’s linear model is:
ϕi = δ1 + δ2 + other stuff
where δ2 is the incremental effect of finishing some (but not all) High School. It goes on
like this, adding another incremental effect for each completed level. An individual with a
Graduate Degree, level 8, gets the linear model:
ϕi =
7
X
j=1
δj + other stuff
And this sum of all the δ parameters is the maximum education effect. It will be very con-
venient for interpretation if we call this maximum sum an ordinary coefficient like βE and
then let the δ parameters be fractions of it. If we also make a dummy δ0 = 0 then we can
write it all very compactly. Like this:
ϕi = βE
Ei−1
X
j=0
δj + other stuff
where Ei is the completed education level of individual i. Now the sum of every δj is 1, and
we can interpret the maximum education effect by looking at βE. In the case of an individual
with Ei = 1, βE does’t appear in the linear model, because βEδ0 = 0.
This βE move also helps us define priors. If the prior expectation is that all of the levels
have the same incremental effect, then we want all the δj’s to have the same prior. We can do
that now and still set a separate prior for maximum effect on βE. βE can be negative as well,
in which case all of the incremental effects are incrementally negative.
I appreciate that all of this is rather bizarre. We are deep inside the tide prediction en-
gine (Chapter 11) now. Understanding always comes with use and practice. So let’s build
education into the ordered logit model as an ordered predictor. First, here’s a mathematical
version of the full model. The probability of the outcome and the linear model are:
Ri ∼Ordered-logit(ϕi, κ)
ϕi = βE
Ei−1
X
j=0
δj + βAAI + βIIi + βCCi
