13.7. PRACTICE
445
How does it work? Supposing you have estimates pi for each demographic category i,
then the post-stratified prediction for the whole population (not the sample) just re-weights
these estimates using the number of individuals Ni in each category:
P
i Nipi
P
i Ni
Compute this for each sample in the posterior distribution, then you’ll have a posterior dis-
tribution of predictions as usual.
Post-stratification does not always work. It is not justified when selection bias is itself
caused by the outcome of interest. Suppose for example that responding to the survey R is
influenced by age A, and that age A influences voting intention V: R ←A →V. In that
case it is possible to estimate the influence of A on V. But if V →R, then there is little hope.
Suppose for example that only supporters respond. Then V = 1 for everyone who responds.
Selection on the outcome variable is one of the worst things that can happen in statistics.
13.6. Summary
This chapter has been an introduction to the motivation, implementation, and inter-
pretation of basic multilevel models. It focused on varying intercepts, which achieve better
estimates of baseline differences among clusters in the data. They achieve better estimates,
because they simultaneously model the population of clusters and use inferences about the
population to pool information among parameters. From another perspective, varying inter-
cepts are adaptively regularized parameters, relying upon a prior that is itself learned from
the data. All of this is a foundation for the next chapter, which extends these concepts to
additional types of parameters and models.
13.7. Practice
Easy.
13E1. Which of the following priors will produce more shrinkage in the estimates? (a) αtank ∼
Normal(0, 1); (b) αtank ∼Normal(0, 2).
13E2. Make the following model into a multilevel model.
yi ∼Binomial(1, pi)
logit(pi) = αgroup[i] + βxi
αgroup ∼Normal(0, 10)
β ∼Normal(0, 1)
13E3. Make the following model into a multilevel model.
yi ∼Normal(µi, σ)
µi = αgroup[i] + βxi
αgroup ∼Normal(0, 10)
β ∼Normal(0, 1)
σ ∼HalfCauchy(0, 2)
13E4. Write an example mathematical model formula for a Poisson regression with varying inter-
cepts.
