442
13. MODELS WITH MEMORY
At some point, you will have to work with a model that link will mangle. At that time, you
can return to this section and peer hard at the code above and still make progress. No matter
what the model is, if it is a Bayesian model, then it is generative. This means that predictions
are made by pushing samples up through the model to get distributions of predictions. Then
you summarize the distributions to summarize the predictions.
13.5.2. Posterior prediction for new clusters. The problem of making predictions for new
clusters is really a problem of generalizing from the sample. In general, there is no unique
procedure for generalizing predictions outside of a sample. The right thing to do depends
upon the causal model, the statistical model, and your goals. But if you have a generative
model, then you can often think your way through it. The key idea is to use the posterior to
parameterize a simulation that embodies the target generalization.
Let’s consider some simple examples.
Suppose you want to predict how chimpanzees in another population would respond
to our lever pulling experiment. The particular 7 chimpanzees in the sample allowed us to
estimate 7 unique intercepts. But these individual actor intercepts aren’t of interest, because
none of these 7 individuals is in the new population.
One way to grasp the task of constructing posterior predictions for new clusters is to
imagine leaving out one of the clusters when you fit the model to the data. For example,
suppose we leave out actor number 7 when we fit the chimpanzees model. Now how can we
assess the model’s accuracy for predicting actor number 7’s behavior? We can’t use any of the
a parameter estimates, because those apply to other individuals. But we can make good use
of the a_bar and sigma_a parameters. These parameters describe a statistical population of
actors, and we can simulate new actors from it.
First, let’s see how to construct posterior predictions for a new, previously unobserved
average actor. By “average,” I mean an individual chimpanzee with an intercept exactly at
a_bar (¯α), the population mean. Since there is uncertainty about the population mean, there
is still uncertainty about this average individual’s intercept. But as you’ll see, the uncertainty
is much smaller than it really should be, if we wish to honestly represent the problem of what
to expect from a new individual.
What we need is our own link function, but now with twist:
R code
13.36
p_link_abar <- function( treatment ) {
logodds <- with( post , a_bar + b[,treatment] )
return( inv_logit(logodds) )
}
Notice that the function ignores block. This is because we are extrapolating to new blocks,
so we assume the average block effect is about zero (which it was in the sample). Call this
function and summarize just as before:
R code
13.37
post <- extract.samples(m13.4)
p_raw <- sapply( 1:4 , function(i) p_link_abar( i ) )
p_mu <- apply( p_raw , 2 , mean )
p_ci <- apply( p_raw , 2 , PI )
plot( NULL , xlab="treatment" , ylab="proportion pulled left" ,
ylim=c(0,1) , xaxt="n" , xlim=c(1,4) )
