13.1. EXAMPLE: MULTILEVEL TADPOLES
415
many cases, we are interested in only one or a few of those levels, and as a consequence,
model comparison using metrics like DIC and WAIC becomes more subtle. The basic logic
remains unchanged, but now we have to make more decisions about which parameters in
the model we wish to focus on.
This chapter has the following progression. First, we’ll work through an extended exam-
ple of building and fitting a multilevel model for clustered data. Then we’ll simulate clustered
data, to demonstrate the improved accuracy the approach delivers. This improved accuracy
arises from the same underfitting and overfitting trade-off you met in Chapter 7. Then we’ll
finish by looking at contexts in which there is more than one type of clustering. All of this
work lays a foundation for more advanced multilevel examples in the next two chapters.
Rethinking: A model by any other name. Multilevel models go by many different names, and some
statisticians use the same names for different specialized variants, while others use them all inter-
changeably. The most common synonyms for “multilevel” are hierarchical and mixed effects.
The type of parameters that appear in multilevel models are most commonly known as random ef-
fects, which itself can mean very different things to different analysts and in different contexts.186
And even the innocent term “level” can mean different things to different people. There’s really no
cure for this swamp of vocabulary aside from demanding a mathematical or algorithmic definition
of the model. Otherwise, there will always be ambiguity.
13.1. Example: Multilevel tadpoles
The heartwarming focus of this example are experiments exploring Reed frog (Hyper-
olius spinigularis) tadpole mortality.187 The natural history background to these data is very
interesting. Take a look at the full paper, if amphibian life history dynamics interests you.
But even if it doesn’t, load the data and acquaint yourself with the variables:
R code
13.1
library(rethinking)
data(reedfrogs)
d <- reedfrogs
str(d)
'data.frame': 48 obs. of
5 variables:
$ density : int
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 ...
$ pred
: Factor w/ 2 levels "no","pred": 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 ...
$ size
: Factor w/ 2 levels "big","small": 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 ...
$ surv
: int
9 10 7 10 9 9 10 9 4 9 ...
$ propsurv: num
0.9 1 0.7 1 0.9 0.9 1 0.9 0.4 0.9 ...
For now, we’ll only be interested in number surviving, surv, out of an initial count, density.
In the practice at the end of the chapter, you’ll consider the other variables, which are exper-
imental manipulations.
There is a lot of variation in these data. Some of the variation comes from experimen-
tal treatment. But a lot of it comes from other sources. Think of each row as a “tank,” an
experimental environment that contains tadpoles. There are lots of things peculiar to each
tank that go unmeasured, and these unmeasured factors create variation in survival across
tanks, even when all the predictor variables have the same value. These tanks are an example
of a cluster variable. Multiple observations, the tadpoles in this case, are made within each
cluster.
