440
13. MODELS WITH MEMORY
13.5. Multilevel posterior predictions
Way back in Chapter 3 (page 64), I commented on the importance of model checking.
Software does not always work as expected, and one robust way to discover mistakes is to
compare the sample to the posterior predictions of a fit model. The same procedure, produc-
ing implied predictions from a fit model, is very helpful for understanding what the model
means. Every model is a merger of sense and nonsense. When we understand a model,
we can find its sense and control its nonsense. But as models get more complex, it is very
difficult to impossible to understand them just by inspecting tables of posterior means and
intervals. Exploring implied posterior predictions helps much more.
Once you believe the posterior is correct, implied predictions are needed to consider
the causal effects. What is the estimated effect of intervening on one or more variables? We
need counterfactual posterior predictions for this question. We saw an example of this in
Chapter 5.
Another role for constructing implied predictions is in computing information cri-
teria, like AIC and WAIC. These criteria provide simple estimates of out-of-sample model
accuracy, the KL divergence. In practical terms, information criteria provide a rough meas-
ure of a model’s flexibility and therefore overfitting risk. This was the big conceptual mission
of Chapter 7.
All of this advice applies to multilevel models as well. We still often need model checks,
counterfactual predictions for understanding, and information criteria. The introduction of
varying effects does introduce nuance, however.
First, we should no longer expect the model to exactly retrodict the sample, because
adaptive regularization has as its goal to trade off poorer fit in sample for better inference
and hopefully better fit out of sample. That is what shrinkage does for us. Of course, we
should never be trying to really retrodict the sample. But now you have to expect that even
a perfectly good model fit will differ from the raw data in a systematic way.
Second, “prediction” in the context of a multilevel model requires additional choices. If
we wish to validate a model against the specific clusters used to fit the model, that is one
thing. But if we instead wish to compute predictions for new clusters, other than the ones
observed in the sample, that is quite another. We’ll consider each of these in turn, continuing
to use the chimpanzees model from the previous section.
13.5.1. Posterior prediction for same clusters. When working with the same clusters as
you used to fit a model, varying intercepts are just parameters. The only trick is to ensure
that you use the right intercept for each case in the data. If you use link and sim to do your
work for you, this is handled automatically. Otherwise, you just use the model definition.
For example, in data(chimpanzees), there are 7 unique actors. These are the clusters.
The varying intercepts model, m13.4, estimated an intercept for each, in addition to two
parameters to describe the mean and standard deviation of the population of actors. We’ll
construct posterior predictions (retrodictions), using both the automated link approach
and doing it from scratch, so there is no confusion.
Before computing predictions, note again that we should no longer expect the posterior
predictive distribution to match the raw data, even when the model worked correctly. Why?
The whole point of partial pooling is to shrink estimates towards the grand mean. So the
estimates should not necessarily match up with the raw data, once you use pooling.
The code needed to compute posterior predictions is just like the code from Chapter 11.
Here it is again, computing and plotting posterior predictions for actor number 2:
