476
14. ADVENTURES IN COVARIANCE
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
gifts household A to household B
gifts B to A
Figure 14.8. Distribution of dyadic gifts
in data(KosterLeckie).
25 households
present 300 dyads, with an overall correlation
of 0.24. But to get a sensible measure of bal-
ance of gift giving, we need to make a model
that deals with the repeat presence of specific
households across dyads.
household IDs in each dyad, and did is a unique dyad ID number. We’ll ignore the other
variables for now.
Figure 14.8 shows the raw distribution of gifts across dyads. The overall correlation here
is 0.24. But taking this as a measure of balance of exchange would be a bad idea. First, the
correlation changes if we switch the A/B labels. Since the labels are arbitrary, that means the
measured correlation is also somewhat arbitrary. Second, the generative model in the back-
ground is that gifts can be explained both by the special relationship in each dyad—some
households tend to exchange gifts frequently—as well as by the fact that some households
give or receive a lot across all dyads, without regard to any special relationships among house-
holds. For example, if a household is poor, it might not give many gifts, but it might receive
many. In order to statistically separate balanced exchange from generalized differences in
giving and receiving, we need a model that treats these as separate. The type of model we’ll
consider is often called a social relations model, or SRM.
Specifically, we’ll model gifts from household A to household B as a combination of vary-
ing effects specific to the household and the dyad. The outcome variables, the gift counts, are
Poisson variables—they are counts with no obvious upper bound. We’ll attach our varying
effects to these counts with a log link, as in the previous chapters. This gives us the first part
of the model:
yA→B ∼Poisson(λAB)
log λAB = α + gA + rB + dAB
The linear model has an intercept α that represent the average gifting rate (on the log scale)
across all dyads. The other effects will be offsets from this average. Then gA is a varying effect
parameter for the generalized giving tendency of household A, regardless of dyad. The effect
rB is the generalized receiving of household B, regardless of dyad. Finally the effect dAB is
the dyad-specific rate that A gives to B. There is a corresponding linear model for the other
direction within the same dyad:
yB→A ∼Poisson(λBA)
log λBA = α + gB + rA + dBA
