434
13. MODELS WITH MEMORY
13.4. Divergent transitions and non-centered priors
With the models in the previous section, Stan reported warnings about divergent
transitions. You first heard about these back in Chapter 9, and I promised to explain them
later. Now is the time to learn what these things are and a few useful ways to fix them. When
you work with multilevel models, divergent transitions are commonplace. So you need to
know how to fix them, and that requires knowing something about what causes them.
One of the best things about Hamiltonian Monte Carlo is that it provides internal checks
of efficiency and accuracy. One of these checks comes free, arising from the constraints on
the physics simulation. Recall that HMC simulates the frictionless flow of a particle on a
surface. In any given transition, which is just a single flick of the particle, the total energy at
the start should be equal to the total energy at the end. That’s how energy in a closed system
works. And in a purely mathematical system, the energy is always conserved correctly. It’s
just a fact about the physics.
But in a numerical system, it might not be. Sometimes the total energy is not the same
at the end as it was at the start. In these cases, the energy is divergent. How can this happen?
It tends to happen when the posterior distribution is very steep in some region of parameter
space. Steep changes in probability are hard for a discrete physics simulation to follow. When
that happens, the algorithm notices by comparing the energy at the start to the energy at the
end. When they don’t match, it indicates numerical problems exploring that part of the
posterior distribution.
Divergent transitions are rejected. They don’t directly damage your approximation of
the posterior distribution. But they do hurt it indirectly, because the region where divergent
transitions happen is hard to explore correctly. And even when there aren’t any divergent
transitions, distributions with steep regions are hard to explore. The chains will be less effi-
cient. And unfortunately this happens quite often in multilevel models.
There are two easy tricks for reducing the impact of divergent transitions. The first is
to tune the simulation so that it doesn’t overshoot the valley wall. This means doing more
warmup with a higher target acceptance rate, Stan’s adapt_delta. But for many models, you
can never tune the sampler enough to remove the divergent transitions. The second trick is
to write the statistical model in a new way, to reparameterize it. For any given statistical
model, it can be written in several forms that are mathematically identical but numerically
different. Switching a model from one form to another is called reparameterization. Let’s
work through two examples.
Rethinking: No free samples. When Hamiltonian Monte Carlo complains about divergent transi-
tions, it is tempting to fall back on some other sampler that complains less. This is a mistake. A Gibbs
sampler, for example, will never complain. It will just silently fail. It is true that Gibbs sampling
doesn’t have the same problem with steep curvature that HMC has. But Gibbs still has problems with
the same posterior distributions. It just provides no warnings.
The general issue—warnings of unreliable approximations—arises in all parts of computational
statistics. The R package lme4 is a nice package for fitting multilevel models. It isn’t Bayesian, but
instead uses a clever non-Bayesian algorithm. Sometimes that algorithm is unreliable, and lme4 is
very good about warning the user. Alternative packages that try to fit the same multilevel models
may not produce warnings nearly as often. But those packages are no more reliable. They are just less
cautious.
