14.3. INSTRUMENTS AND CAUSAL DESIGNS
469
to an outcome. Some of those paths are causal, so we want to leave them open. Other paths
are non-causal, for example back-door paths. We want to close those, as well as not acciden-
tally open them by including the wrong variables in the model.
Of course sometimes it won’t be possible to close all of the non-causal paths. What
can be done in that case? More than nothing. If you are lucky, there are ways to exploit a
combination of natural experiments and clever modeling that allow causal inference even
when non-causal paths cannot be closed.
We’ll start with the most famous, and possibly least intuitive, example. Then we’ll move
on to describe some other approaches.
14.3.1. Instrumental variables. Consider the impact of education E on wages W. Does
more school improve future wages? If we just regress wages on achieved education, we expect
the inference to be biased by factors that influence both wages and education. For example,
industrious people may both complete more education and earn higher wages, generating a
correlation between education and wages. But that doesn’t necessarily mean that education
causes higher wages. It is often difficult to measure, or even imagine, all of the possible
confounds of this kind. We end up with a DAG like this:
E
U
W
The back-door path E ←U →W ruins our day.
Even though we cannot condition on U, since we haven’t observed it, there might be
something we can do. If we can find a suitable instrumental variable. In causal terms,
an instrumental variable is a variable that acts like a natural experiment on the exposure E.
In technical terms, an instrumental variable Q is a variable that satisfies these criteria:
(1) Independent of U (Q ⊥⊥U)
(2) Not independent of E (Q̸⊥⊥E)
(3) Q cannot influence W except through E
This last line is sometimes called the exclusion restriction. It cannot be tested, and it
is often implausible. Similarly, the first line above cannot be tested. But if you have a strong
understanding of the system, so that you believe these criteria, then magic can happen.
It is much easier to understand instruments with a DAG. In our education and wages
example, the simplest instrument for education looks like this:
E
Q
U
W
The instrument here is Q. Given this DAG, Q satisfies all of the criteria for a valid instru-
mental variable. Note that valid instruments can be embedded in much more complicated
graphs. If you can condition on other variables, in order to satisfy the criteria listed above,
then you have an instrument.
How do we use Q in a model? You cannot just add it to a regression like any other
predictor variable. Why not? Suppose we regress W on E. This is the relationship we’d like
