12.2. ZERO-INFLATED OUTCOMES
389
p
1 – p
observe y = 0
observe y > 0
Drink
Work
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
150
manuscripts completed
Frequency
Figure 12.3. Left: Structure of the zero-inflated likelihood calculation. Be-
ginning at the top, the monks drink p of the time or instead work 1 −p of
the time. Drinking monks always produce an observation y = 0. Working
monks may produce either y = 0 or y > 0. Right: Frequency distribution of
zero-inflated observations. The blue line segment over zero shows the y = 0
observations that arose from drinking. In real data, we typically cannot see
which zeros come from which process.
but with a large number of trials and very low probability, so the distribution tends towards
Poisson.
Now imagine that the monks take breaks on some days. On those days, no manuscripts
are completed. Instead, the wine cellar is opened and more earthly delights are practiced.
As the monastery owner, you’d like to know how often the monks drink. The obstacle for
inference is that there will be zeros on honest non-drinking days, as well, just by chance. So
how can you estimate the number of days spent drinking?
Let’s make a mixture to solve this problem.178 We want to consider that any zero in the
data can arise from two processes: (1) the monks spent the day drinking and (2) they worked
that day but nevertheless failed to complete any manuscripts. Let p be the probability the
monks spend the day drinking. Let λ be the mean number of manuscripts completed, when
the monks work.
To get this model going, we need to define a likelihood function that mixes these two
processes. To grasp how we can construct such a monster, think of the monks’ drinking as
resulting from a coin flip (Figure 12.3). The “coin” shows a cask of wine on one side and a
quill on the other. The probability the wine cask shows is p, which could be any value from
0 to 1. Depending upon the outcome of the coin flip, the monks either begin drinking or
rather begin copying. Drinking monks always produce zero completed manuscripts. Work-
ing monks produce a Poisson number of completed manuscripts with some average rate λ.
So it is possible still to observe a zero, even when the monks work.
