14.4. SOCIAL RELATIONS AS CORRELATED VARYING EFFECTS
475
by other causes. Everything has a mechanism. Z in the DAG above is such a mechanism. If
you have a believable Z variable, then the causal effect of X on Y is estimated by expressing
the generative model as a statistical model, similar to the instrumental variable example be-
fore. In special cases, such as when everything is linear and Gaussian, there is a formula. But
we don’t need formulas. We just need to think generatively and use Bayes.
The front-door criterion isn’t used much. This may be because it is relatively new or
rather that believable Z variables are rare. A possible example is the influence of social ties
formed in college on voting behavior in the United States Senate.201 The question is whether
senators who went to the same college vote more similarly, because their social ties produce
coordinated votes. The pure association between attending the same college and voting the
same way is obviously confounded by lots of things. The front-door trick is to find some
mechanism through which social ties must act. In the case of the United States Senate, a
mechanism could be who sits next to who. It is easier to talk to and coordinate with people
sitting nearby. And since junior members are often assigned seats effectively at random,
seating is unlikely to share the same confounds as college attendance. Now consider some
senators who attended UCLA. Some of them end up seated near one another. Others end up
seated next to dreadful UC Berkeley alums. If the ones seated near one another vote more
similarly to one another than to the UCLA alums seated elsewhere, that could be causal
evidence that social ties influence voting, as mediated by proximity on the Senate floor.
A much more common design is regression discontinuity (or RDD). This is really
a special kind of instrumental variable design. Suppose for example that we want to estimate
the effect of winning an academic award on future success.202 This is confounded by unob-
served factors, like ability, that influence both the award and later success. But if we compare
individuals who were just below the cutoff for the award to those who were just above the
cutoff, these individuals should be more similar in the unobserved factors. It’s as if the award
is applied at random, for individuals close to the cutoff. This is key idea behind regression
discontinuity. In practice, one regression is fit for individuals above the cutoff and another
to those below the cutoff. Then an estimate of the causal effect is the average difference be-
tween individuals just above and just below the cutoff. While the difference near the cutoff is
of interest, the entire function influences this difference. So some care is needed in choosing
functions for the overall relationship between the exposure and the outcome.203
14.4. Social relations as correlated varying effects
Once you grasp the basic strategy of using covariance matrixes to represent populations
of correlated effects, you can accomplish a lot of different and scientifically relevant modeling
goals. In this section, I present an example that constructs a custom covariance matrix with
special scientific meaning.
The data we’ll work with are data(KosterLeckie), which loads two different tables,
kl_dyads and kl_households. See ?KosterLeckie for more details.204
R code
14.30
library(rethinking)
data(KosterLeckie)
For now, we want to use the variables in kl_dyads. Each row in this table is a dyad of
households from a community in Nicaragua. We are interested in modeling gift exchanges
among these households. The outcome variables giftsAB and giftsBA in each row are the
count of gifts in each direction within each dyad. The variables hidA and hidB tell us the
