13 Models With Memory
In the year 1985, Clive Wearing lost his mind, but not his music.185 Wearing was a
musicologist and accomplished musician, but the same virus that causes cold sores, Herpes
simplex, snuck into his brain and ate his hippocampus. The result was chronic anterograde
amnesia—he cannot form new long-term memories. He remembers how to play the piano,
though he cannot remember that he played it 5 minutes ago. Wearing now lives moment to
moment, unaware of anything more than a few minutes into the past. Every cup of coffee is
the first he has ever had.
Many statistical models also have anterograde amnesia. As the models move from one
cluster—individual, group, location—in the data to another, estimating parameters for each
cluster, they forget everything about the previous clusters. They behave this way, because
the assumptions force them to. Any of the models from previous chapters that used dummy
variables (page 157) to handle categories are programmed for amnesia. These models im-
plicitly assume that nothing learned about any one category informs estimates for the other
categories—the parameters are independent of one another and learn from completely sepa-
rate portions of the data. This would be like forgetting you had ever been in a café, each time
you go to a new café. Cafés do differ, but they are also alike.
Anterograde amnesia is bad for learning about the world. We want models that instead
use all of the information in savvy ways. This does not mean treating all clusters as if they
were the same. Instead it means learning simultaneously about each cluster while learning
about the population of clusters. Doing both estimation tasks at the same time allows us to
transfer information across clusters, and that transfer improves accuracy. That is the value
of remembering.
Consider cafés again. Suppose we program a robot to visit two cafés, order coffee, and
estimate the waiting times at each. The robot begins with a vague prior for the waiting times,
say with a mean of 5 minutes and a standard deviation of 1. After ordering a cup of coffee
at the first café, the robot observes a waiting time of 4 minutes. It updates its prior, using
Bayes’ theorem of course, with this information. This gives it a posterior distribution for the
waiting time at the first café.
Now the robot moves on to a second café. When this robot arrives at the next café, what
is its prior? It could just use the posterior distribution from the first café as its prior for the
second café. But that implicitly assumes that the two cafés have the same average waiting
time. Cafés are all pretty much the same, but they aren’t identical. Likewise, it doesn’t make
much sense to ignore the observation from the first café. That would be anterograde amnesia.
So how can the coffee robot do better? It needs to represent the population of cafés and
learn about that population. The distribution of waiting times in the population becomes
the prior for each café. But unlike priors in previous chapters, this prior is actually learned
413
