474
14. ADVENTURES IN COVARIANCE
made some islands easier to reach—but not economic performance directly, then it could
serve as an instrument. This is a very clever idea. But it is easy to imagine that wind in-
fluences many things about an island, including its pre-colonial history of contact and its
ecology, and that these variables will influence current economies.
A much more common type of instrument is distance to some service. If for example we
want to estimate the influence of health care on the wellbeing of mothers, we cannot easily
randomize health care among mothers. It would be unethical, for starters. But if mothers
naturally vary in distance to care centers, and these distances are random with respect to
pre-existing health variables, then distance might be an instrument that influences use of
health care but does not influence health directly. However. it’s not hard to think of ways
that distance from a hospital could be associated with factors influencing health, violating
the exclusion restriction.199
In general, it is not possible to statistical prove whether a variable is a good instrument.
As always, we need scientific knowledge outside of the data to make sense of the data.
Rethinking: Two-stage worst squares. The instrumental variable model is often discussed with an
estimation procedure known as two-stage least squares (2SLS). This procedure involves two
linear regressions. The predicted values of the first regression are fed into the second as data, and then
adjustments are made so that the standard errors make sense. Amazingly, when the weather is nice,
this procedure works. It relies upon large-sample approximations and has well-known problems.200
Like all golems, you just have to use it responsibly. Sometimes people mistake the procedure of 2SLS
for the model of instrumental variables. They are not the same thing. Any model can be estimated
through a number of different procedures, each with its own benefits and costs. 2SLS is very limiting.
If we have count outcomes, measurement errors, missing values, or need varying effects, 2SLS is
dubious. Now that more capable procedures exist, it is easier to fit instrumental variable models.
But it can still be difficult. There are no guarantees that an effect can be estimated, just because the
DAG says it is possible. Another issue that will always remain, no matter how you approximate the
posterior, is that it is very hard to be sure the instrumental variable is any good.
14.3.2. Other designs. Instrumental variables are natural experiments that impersonate
randomized experiments. In the example in the previous section, quarter of birth Q is like
an external manipulation of education E. That external shock to education is like an exper-
imental manipulation, in the sense that it allows us to estimate the impact of that external
shock and thereby derive a causal estimate.
There are potentially many ways to find natural experiments. Not all of them are strictly
instrumental variables. But they can provide theoretically correct designs for causal infer-
ence, if you can believe the assumptions. Let’s consider two more.
In addition to the back-door criterion you met in Chapter 6, there is something called
the front-door criterion. It is relevant in a DAG like this:
U
X
Y
Z
We are interest, as usual, in the causal influence of X on Y. But there is an unobserved con-
found U, again as usual. It turns out that, if we can find a perfect mediator Z, then we can
possibly estimate the causal effect of X on Y. It isn’t crazy to think that causes are mediated
