14.5. CONTINUOUS CATEGORIES AND THE GAUSSIAN PROCESS
481
R code
14.36
dy1 <- apply( post$d[,,1] , 2 , mean )
dy2 <- apply( post$d[,,2] , 2 , mean )
plot( dy1 , dy2 )
The result is the righthand plot in Figure 14.9. These are only posterior means—there is a
lot of uncertainty about each dyad. But there is an astonishing amount of balance. This could
reflect reciprocity, adjusted for overall wealth levels. Or it could reflect types of relationships
among households, like kin obligations, that we haven’t included in the model.
The full dataset contains a number of covariates that can be used to explain these effects:
economic activities, relationships, distances among households. A model like this one, with
only varying effects, can partition the variation and show us where the action is. But our goal
is to gain some causal understanding through adding more information to the model.
Rethinking: Where everybody knows your name. The gift example is a social network model. In
that light, an important feature missing from this model is the transitivity of social relationships.
If household A is friends with household B, and household C is friends with household B, then house-
holds A and C are more likely to be friends. This isn’t magic. It just arises from unobserved factors
that create correlated relationships. For example, people who go to the same pub tend to know one
another. The pub is an unmeasured confound for inferring causes of social relations. Models that can
estimate and expect transitivity can be better. This can be done using something called a stochastic
block model. However to fit such a model, we’ll need some techniques in the next chapter.
14.5. Continuous categories and the Gaussian process
All of the varying effects so far, whether they were intercepts or slopes, have been de-
fined over discrete, unordered categories. For example, cafés are unique places, and there
is no sense in which café 1 comes before café 2. The “1” and “2” are just labels for unique
things. The same goes for tadpole ponds, academic departments, or individual chimpanzees.
By estimating unique parameters for each cluster of this kind, we can quantify some of the
unique features that generate variation across clusters and covariation among the observa-
tions within each cluster. Pooling across the clusters improves accuracy and simultaneously
provides a picture of the variation.
But what about continuous dimensions of variation like age or income or stature? Indi-
viduals of the same age share some of the same exposures. They listened to some of the same
music, heard about the same politicians, and experienced the same weather events. And
individuals of similar ages also experienced some of these same exposures, but to a lesser
extent than individuals of the same age. The covariation falls off as any two individuals be-
come increasingly dissimilar in age or income or stature or any other dimension that indexes
background similarity. It doesn’t make sense to estimate a unique varying intercept for all
individuals of the same age, ignoring the fact that individuals of similar ages should have
more similar intercepts. And of course, it’s likely that every individual in your sample has a
unique age. So then continuous differences in similarity are all you have to work with.
Luckily, there is a way to apply the varying effects approach to continuous categories of
this kind. This will allow us to estimate a unique intercept (or slope) for any age, while still
regarding age as a continuous dimension in which similar ages have more similar intercepts
(or slopes). The general approach is known as Gaussian process regression.205 This
name is unfortunately wholly uninformative about what it is for and how it works.
