13.2. VARYING EFFECTS AND THE UNDERFITTING/OVERFITTING TRADE-OFF
423
and so these estimates are rather imprecise. This is particularly true of the smaller ponds,
where less data goes into producing the estimates. As a consequence, the error of these esti-
mates is high, and they are rather overfit to the data. Standard errors for each intercept can
be very large, and in extreme cases, even infinite. These are sometimes called the no pool-
ing estimates. No information is shared across ponds. It’s like assuming that the variation
among ponds is infinite, so nothing you learn from one pond helps you predict another.
Third, when you estimate varying intercepts, you use partial pooling of information
to produce estimates for each cluster that are less underfit than the grand mean and less
overfit than the no-pooling estimates. As a consequence, they tend to be better estimates
of the true per-cluster (per-pond) means. This will be especially true when ponds have few
tadpoles in them, because then the no pooling estimates will be especially overfit. When a
lot of data goes into each pond, then there will be less difference between the varying effect
estimates and the no pooling estimates.
To demonstrate this fact, we’ll simulate some tadpole data. That way, we’ll know the
true per-pond survival probabilities. Then we can compare the no-pooling estimates to the
partial pooling estimates, by computing how close each gets to the true values they are trying
to estimate. The rest of this section shows how to do such a simulation.
Learning to simulate and validate models and model fitting in this way is extremely valu-
able. Once you start using more complex models, you will want to ensure that your code is
working and that you understand the model. You can help in this project by simulating data
from the model, with specified parameter values, and then making sure that your method of
estimation can recover the parameters within tolerable ranges of precision. Even just simu-
lating data from a model structure has a huge impact on understanding.
13.2.1. The model. The first step is to define the model we’ll be using. I’ll use the same basic
multilevel binomial model as before, but now with “ponds” instead of “tanks”:
Si ∼Binomial(Ni, pi)
logit(pi) = αpond[i]
αj ∼Normal(¯α, σ)
¯α ∼Normal(0, 1.5)
σ ∼Exponential(1)
So to simulate data from this process, we need to assign values to:
• ¯α, the average log-odds of survival in the entire population of ponds
• σ, the standard deviation of the distribution of log-odds of survival among ponds
• α, a vector of individual pond intercepts, one for each pond
We’ll also need to assign sample sizes, Ni, to each pond. But once we’ve made all of those
choices, we can easily simulate counts of surviving tadpoles, straight from the top-level bi-
nomial process, using rbinom. We’ll do it all one step at a time.
Note that the priors are part of the model when we estimate, but not when we simu-
late. Why? Because priors are epistemology, not ontology. They represent the initial state of
information of our robot, not a statement about how nature chooses parameter values.
13.2.2. Assignvaluestotheparameters. I’m goingto assign specific values representativeof
the actual tadpole data, to make the upcoming plot that demonstrates the increased accuracy
of the varying effects estimates. But you can come back to this step later and change them to
whatever you want.
