410
12. MONSTERS AND MIXTURES
12H1. In 2014, a paper was published that was entitled “Female hurricanes are deadlier than male
hurricanes.”184 As the title suggests, the paper claimed that hurricanes with female names have caused
greater loss of life, and the explanation given is that people unconsciously rate female hurricanes as
less dangerous and so are less likely to evacuate.
Statisticians severely criticized the paper after publication. Here, you’ll explore the complete data
used in the paper and consider the hypothesis that hurricanes with female names are deadlier. Load
the data with:
R code
12.38
library(rethinking)
data(Hurricanes)
Acquaint yourself with the columns by inspecting the help ?Hurricanes.
In this problem, you’ll focus on predicting deaths using femininity of each hurricane’s name.
Fit and interpret the simplest possible model, a Poisson model of deaths using femininity as a
predictor. You can use map or map2stan. Compare the model to an intercept-only Poisson model of
deaths. How strong is the association between femininity of name and deaths? Which storms does
the model fit (retrodict) well? Which storms does it fit poorly?
12H2. Counts are nearly always over-dispersed relative to Poisson. So fit a gamma-Poisson (aka
negative-binomial) model to predict deaths using femininity. Show that the over-dispersed model
no longer shows as precise a positive association between femininity and deaths, with an 89% interval
that overlaps zero. Can you explain why the association diminished in strength?
12H3. In order to infer a strong association between deaths and femininity, it’s necessary to include
an interaction effect. In the data, there are two measures of a hurricane’s potential to cause death:
damage_norm and min_pressure. Consult ?Hurricanes for their meanings. It makes some sense
to imagine that femininity of a name matters more when the hurricane is itself deadly. This implies
an interaction between femininity and either or both of damage_norm and min_pressure.
Fit a series of models evaluating these interactions. Interpret and compare the models. In inter-
preting the estimates, it may help to generate counterfactual predictions contrasting hurricanes with
masculine and feminine names. Are the effect sizes plausible?
12H4. In the original hurricanes paper, storm damage (damage_norm) was used directly. This as-
sumption implies that mortality increases exponentially with a linear increase in storm strength, be-
cause a Poisson regression uses a log link. So it’s worth exploring an alternative hypothesis: that the
logarithm of storm strength is what matters. Explore this by using the logarithm of damage_norm as
a predictor. Using the best model structure from the previous problem, compare a model that uses
log(damage_norm) to a model that uses damage_norm directly. Compare their DIC/WAIC values
as well as their implied predictions. What do you conclude?
12H5. One hypothesis from developmental psychology, usually attributed to Carol Gilligan, pro-
poses that women and men have different average tendencies in moral reasoning. Like most hy-
potheses in social psychology, it is merely descriptive. The notion is that women are more concerned
with care (avoiding harm), while men are more concerned with justice and rights. Culture-bound
nonsense? Yes. Descriptively accurate? Maybe.
Evaluate this hypothesis, using the Trolley data, supposing that contact provides a proxy for
physical harm. Are women more or less bothered by contact than are men, in these data? Figure out
the model(s) that is needed to address this question.
12H6. The data in data(Fish) are records of visits to a national park. See ?Fish for details. The
question of interest is how many fish an average visitor takes per hour, when fishing. The problem is
that not everyone tried to fish, so the fish_caught numbers are zero-inflated. As with the monks
