13.2. VARYING EFFECTS AND THE UNDERFITTING/OVERFITTING TRADE-OFF
427
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
pond
absolute error
tiny ponds (5)
small ponds (10)
medium ponds (25)
large ponds (35)
Figure 13.3. Error of no-pooling and partial pooling estimates, for the sim-
ulated tadpole ponds. The horizontal axis displays pond number. The verti-
cal axis measures the absolute error in the predicted proportion of survivors,
compared to the true value used in the simulation. The higher the point,
the worse the estimate. No-pooling shown in blue. Partial pooling shown
in black. The blue and dashed black lines show the average error for each
kind of estimate, across each initial density of tadpoles (pond size). Smaller
ponds produce more error, but the partial pooling estimates are better on
average, especially in smaller ponds.
R code
13.19
nopool_avg <- aggregate(nopool_error,list(dsim$Ni),mean)
partpool_avg <- aggregate(partpool_error,list(dsim$Ni),mean)
The first thing to notice about Figure 13.3 plot is that both kinds of estimates are much
more accurate for larger ponds, on the right side. This arises because more data means better
estimates, assuming there is no confounding. If there is confounding, more data may just
makes things worse. But there is no confounding in this simulated example. In the small
ponds, sample size is small, and neither no-pooling nor partial-pooling can work magic.
Therefore, prediction suffers on the left side of the plot. Second, note that the blue line is
always above or very close to the black dashed line. This indicates that the no-pool estimates,
shown by the blue points, have higher average error in each group of ponds, except for the
medium ponds. Partial pooling isn’t always better. It’s just better on average in the long run.
Even though both kinds of estimates get worse as sample size decreases, the varying effect
estimates have the advantage, on average. Third, the distance between the blue line and the
black dashed line grows as ponds get smaller. So while both kinds of estimates suffer from
reduced sample size, the partial pooling estimates suffer less.
The pattern displayed in the figure is representative, but only one random simulation.
To see how to quickly re-run the model on newly simulated data, without re-compiling the
model, see the Overthinking box at the end of this section.
