12.6. PRACTICE
409
This model seems to think that education is much more weakly associated with rating. This
is possibly because the effect isn’t actually linear. Different levels have different incremental
associations.
This example has been fine for teaching how to build ordered predictors. But from a
causal perspective, a lurking concern must be whether the association with education is
spurious. Education is highly correlated with age, because age causes (for lack of a better
word) the completion of levels of education. So there is plausibly a backdoor from educa-
tion through age to rating. In the problems at the end of the chapter, I’ll ask you to draw the
DAG that this implies and investigate it with some new modeling.
12.5. Summary
This chapter introduced several new types of regression, all of which are generalizations
of generalized linear models (GLMs). Ordered logistic models are useful for categorical
outcomes with a strict ordering. They are built by attaching a cumulative link function to
a categorical outcome distribution. Zero-inflated models mix together two different out-
come distributions, allowing us to model outcomes with an excess of zeros. Models for over-
dispersion, such as beta-binomial and gamma-Poisson, draw the expected value of each ob-
servation from a distribution that changes shape as a function of a linear model. The next
chapter further generalizes these model types by introducing multilevel models.
12.6. Practice
Easy.
12E1. What is the difference between an ordered categorical variable and an unordered one? Define
and then give an example of each.
12E2. What kind of link function does an ordered logistic regression employ? How does it differ
from an ordinary logit link?
12E3. When count data are zero-inflated, using a model that ignores zero-inflation will tend to in-
duce which kind of inferential error?
12E4. Over-dispersion is common in count data. Give an example of a natural process that might
produce over-dispersed counts. Can you also give an example of a process that might produce under-
dispersed counts?
Medium.
12M1. At a certain university, employees are annually rated from 1 to 4 on their productivity, with
1 being least productive and 4 most productive. In a certain department at this certain university
in a certain year, the numbers of employees receiving each rating were (from 1 to 4): 12, 36, 7, 41.
Compute the log cumulative odds of each rating.
12M2. Make a version of Figure 12.5 for the employee ratings data given just above.
12M3. Can you modify the derivation of the zero-inflated Poisson distribution (ZIPoisson) from
the chapter to construct a zero-inflated binomial distribution?
Hard.
