13.3. MORE THAN ONE TYPE OF CLUSTER
429
13.3. More than one type of cluster
We can use and often should use more than one type of cluster in the same model. For
example, the observations in data(chimpanzees), which you met back in Chapter 11, are
lever pulls. Each pull is within a cluster of pulls belonging to an individual chimpanzee. But
each pull is also within an experimental block, which represents a collection of observations
that happened on the same day. So each observed pull belongs to both an actor (1 to 7) and
a block (1 to 6). There may be unique intercepts for each actor as well as for each block.
So in this section we’ll reconsider the chimpanzees data, using both types of clusters
simultaneously. This will allow us to use partial pooling on both categorical variables, actor
and block, at the same time. We’ll also get estimates of the variation among actors and
among blocks.
Rethinking: Cross-classification and hierarchy. The kind of data structure in data(chimpanzees)
is usually called a cross-classified multilevel model. It is cross-classified, because actors are not
nested within unique blocks. If each chimpanzee had instead done all of his or her pulls on a single
day, within a single block, then the data structure would instead be hierarchical. However, the model
specification would typically be the same. So the model structure and code you’ll see below will apply
both to cross-classified designs and hierarchical designs. Other software sometimes forces you to treat
these differently, on account of using a conditioning engine substantially less capable than MCMC.
There are other types of “hierarchical” multilevel models, types that make adaptive priors for adaptive
priors. It’s turtles all the way down, recall (page 14). You’ll see an example in the next chapter. But
for the most part, people (or their software) nearly always use the same kind of model in both cases.
13.3.1. Multilevelchimpanzees. Let’s proceed by takingthechimpanzees modelfromChap-
ter 11 (m11.4, page 338) and add varying intercepts. To add varying intercepts to this model,
we just replace the fixed regularizing prior with an adaptive prior. We’ll also add a second
cluster type. To add the second cluster type, block, we merely replicate the structure for the
actor cluster. This means the linear model gets yet another varying intercept, αblock[i], and
the model gets another adaptive prior and yet another standard deviation parameter.
Here is the mathematical form of the model, with the new pieces of the machine high-
lighted in blue:
Li ∼Binomial(1, pi)
logit(pi) = αactor[i] + γblock[i] + βtreatment[i]
βj ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
, for j = 1..4
αj ∼Normal(¯α, σα)
, for j = 1..7
γj ∼Normal(0, σγ)
, for j = 1..6
¯α ∼Normal(0, 1.5)
σα ∼Exponential(1)
σγ ∼Exponential(1)
Each cluster gets its own vector of parameters. For actors, the vector is α, and it has length 7,
because there are 7 chimpanzees in the sample. For blocks, the vector is γ, and it has length 6,
because there are 6 blocks. Each cluster variable needs its own standard deviation parameter
