13.1. EXAMPLE: MULTILEVEL TADPOLES
417
changes from the previous model highlighted in blue:
Si ∼Binomial(Ni, pi)
logit(pi) = αtank[i]
αj ∼Normal(¯α, σ)
[adaptive prior]
¯α ∼Normal(0, 1.5)
[prior for average tank]
σ ∼Exponential(1)
[prior for standard deviation of tanks]
Notice that the prior for the tank intercepts is now a function of two parameters, ¯α and
σ. You can say ¯α like “bar alpha.” The bar means average. These two parameters inside the
prior is where the “multi” in multilevel arises.189 The Gaussian distribution with mean ¯α and
standard deviation σ is the prior for each tank’s intercept. But that prior itself has priors for ¯α
and σ. So there are two levels in the model, each resembling a simpler model. In the top level,
the outcome is S, the parameters are the vector α, and the prior is αj ∼Normal(¯α, σ). In the
second level, the “outcome” variable is the vector of intercept parameters, α. The parameters
are ¯α and σ, and their priors are ¯α ∼Normal(0, 1.5) and σ ∼Exponential(1).
These two parameters, ¯α and σ, are often referred to as hyperparameters. They are
parameters for parameters. And their priors are often called hyperpriors. In principle,
there is no limit to how many “hyper” levels you can install in a model. For example, different
populations of tanks could be embedded within different regions of habitat. But in practice
there are limits, both because of computation and our ability to understand the model.
Rethinking: Why Gaussian tanks? In the multilevel tadpole model, the population of tanks is as-
sumed to be Gaussian. Why? The least satisfying answer is “convention.” The Gaussian assumption
is extremely common. A more satisfying answer is “pragmatism.” The Gaussian assumption is easy
to work with, and it generalizes easily to more than one dimension. This generalization will be impor-
tant for handling varying slopes in the next chapter. But my preferred answer is instead “entropy.” If
all we are willing to say about a distribution is the mean and variance, then the Gaussian is the most
conservative assumption (Chapter 10). Using a Gaussian here does not force the resulting posterior
distribution of α parameters to be symmetric or have a Gaussian shape. The only information in a
Gaussian prior (or likelihood) is finite variance. The distribution looks symmetric, because if you
don’t say how it is skewed, then symmetric is the maximum entropy shape. Above all, there is no rule
requiring the Gaussian distribution of varying effects. So if you have a good reason to use another
distribution, then do so. The practice problems at the end of the chapter provide an example.
Computing the posterior computes both levels simultaneously, in the same way that our
robot at the start of the chapter learned both about each café and the variation among cafés.
But you cannot fit this model with quap. Why? Because the probability of the data must now
average over the level 2 parameters ¯α and σ. But quap just hill climbs, using static values for
all of the parameters. It can’t see the levels. For more explanation, see the Overthinking box
further down. You can however fit this model with ulam:
R code
13.3
m13.2 <- ulam(
alist(
S ~ dbinom( N , p ) ,
logit(p) <- a[tank] ,
a[tank] ~ dnorm( a_bar , sigma ) ,
a_bar ~ dnorm( 0 , 1.5 ) ,
