14 Adventures in Covariance
Recall the coffee robot from the introduction to the previous chapter (page 413). This
robot is programmed to move among cafés, order coffee, and record the waiting time. The
previous chapter focused on the fact that the robot learns more efficiently when it pools
information among the cafés. Varying intercepts are a mechanism for achieving that pooling.
Now suppose that the robot also records the time of day, morning or afternoon. The av-
erage wait time in the morning tends to be longer than the average wait time in the afternoon.
This is because cafés are busier in the morning. But just like cafés vary in their average wait
times, they also vary in their differences between morning and afternoon. In conventional
regression, these differences in wait time between morning and afternoon are slopes, since
they express the change in expectation when an indictor (or dummy, page 157) variable for
time of day changes value. The linear model might look like this:
µi = αcafé[i] + βcafé[i]Ai
where Ai is a 0/1 indicator for afternoon and βcafé[i] is a parameter for the expected difference
between afternoon and morning for each café.
Since the robot more efficiently learns about the intercepts, αcafé[i] above, when it pools
information about intercepts, it likewise learns more efficiently about the slopes when it also
pools information about slopes. And the pooling is achieved in the same way, by estimating
the population distribution of slopes at the same time the robot estimates each slope. The
distributions assigned to both intercepts and slopes enable pooling for both, as the model
(robot) learns the prior from the data.
This is the essence of the general varying effects strategy: Any batch of parameters
with exchangeable index values can and probably should be pooled. Exchangeable just means
the index values have no true ordering, because they are arbitrary labels. There’s nothing
special about intercepts; slopes can also vary by unit in the data, and pooling information
among them makes better use of the data. So our coffee robot should be programmed to
model both the population of intercepts and the population of slopes. Then it can use pooling
for both and squeeze more information out of the data.
But here’s a fact that will help us to squeeze even more information out of the data: Cafés
covary in their intercepts and slopes. Why? At a popular café, wait times are on average long
in the morning, because staff are very busy (Figure 14.1). But the same café will be much
less busy in the afternoon, leading to a large difference between morning and afternoon wait
times. At such a popular café, the intercept is high and the slope is far from zero, because the
difference between morning and afternoon waits is large. But at a less popular café, the dif-
ference will be small. Such an unpopular café makes you wait less in the morning—because
449
