394
12. MONSTERS AND MIXTURES
The experimental context within which we’ll explore these principles comprises stories
that vary the principles, while keeping many of the basic objects and actors the same. For
example, the version of the boxcar story quoted just above implies the action principle, but
not the others. Since the actor (Dennis) had to do something to create the outcome, rather
than remain passive, this is an action scenario. However, the harm caused to the one man
who will fall is not necessary, or intended, in order to save the five. Thus it is not an example
of the intention principle. And there is no direct contact, so it is also not an example of the
contact principle.
You can construct a boxcar story with the same outline, but now with both the action
principle and the intention principle. That is, in this version, the actor both does something
to change the outcome and the action must cause harm to the one person in order to save
the other five:
Standing by the railroad tracks, Evan sees an empty, out-of-control boxcar about
to hit five people. Next to Evan is a lever that can be pulled, lowering the railing
on a footbridge that spans the main track, and causing one person to fall off the
footbridge and onto the main track, where he will be hit by the boxcar. The boxcar
will slow down because of the one person, therefore preventing the five from being
hit. If Evan pulls the lever the one person will fall and be hit by the boxcar, and
therefore the boxcar will slow down and not hit the five people. If Evan does not
pull the lever the boxcar will continue down the tracks and hit the five people, and
the one person will remain safe above the main track.
Most people judge that, if Even pulls the lever, it is morally worse (less permissible) than
when Dennis pulls the lever. You’ll see by how much, as we analyze these data. Load the
data:
R code
12.12
library(rethinking)
data(Trolley)
d <- Trolley
There are 12 columns and 9930 rows, comprising data for 331 unique individuals. The out-
come we’ll be interested in is response, which is an integer from 1 to 7 indicating how
morally permissible the participant found the action to be taken (or not) in the story. Since
this type of rating is categorical and ordered, it’s exactly the right type of problem for our
ordered model.
12.3.2. Describing an ordered distribution with intercepts. First, let’s see how to describe a
distribution of discrete ordered values. Take a look at the overall distribution, the histogram,
of the outcome variable.
R code
12.13
simplehist( d$response , xlim=c(1,7) , xlab="response" )
The result is shown in the left-hand plot in Figure 12.4.
Our goal is to re-describe this histogram on the log-cumulative-odds scale. This just
means constructing the odds of a cumulative probability and then taking a logarithm. Why
do this arcane thing? Because this is the cumulative analog of the logit link we used in pre-
vious chapters. The logit is log-odds, and cumulative logit is log-cumulative-odds. Both are
