454
14. ADVENTURES IN COVARIANCE
2
3
4
5
6
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
intercepts (a_cafe)
slopes (b_cafe)
Figure 14.2. 20 cafés sampled from a statisti-
cal population. The horizontal axis is the inter-
cept (average morning wait) for each cafe. The
vertical axis is the slope (average difference be-
tween afternoon and morning wait) for each
café.
The gray ellipses illustrate the multi-
variate Gaussian population of intercepts and
slopes.
Overthinking: Variance, covariance, correlation. In typical statistical usage, we define covariance
using three parameters: (1) the standard deviation of the first variable (σα for example), (2) the stan-
dard deviation of the second variable (σβ for example), and (3) the correlation between the two vari-
ables (ραβ for example). Why is the covariance equal to σασβραβ?
The usual definition of the covariance between two variables x and y is cov(x, y) = E(xy) −
E(x) E(y). You can say this as “the covariance is the difference between the average product and the
product of the averages.” The variance is just a special case of this, the covariance of a variable with
itself: var(x) = cov(x, x) = E(x2) −E(x)2. If we consider only random variables with expecta-
tion zero—no harm done, since we can recenter at will—then these are just cov(x, y) = E(xy) and
var(x) = E(x2).
A correlation is just a rescaled covariance, so that the minimum is −1 and the maximum is 1.
We can standardize a covariance this way by dividing it by the maximum possible covariance, which
turns out to be
p
var(x) var(y), the product of the standard deviations. Now to show you that this is
the largest that cov(x, y) = E(xy) can ever be. A covariance will be largest when the second variable
y is just a rescaled copy of x. For example, let yi = pxi, where p is some proportion like 0.5 or
1.5. So y = px is just a stretched x. The covariance is now cov(x, y) = E(px2) = p E(x2). The
variances are var(x) = E(x2) and var(y) = E(y2) = E(p2x2) = p2 E(x2). Having fun yet? Here
comes the end. var(x) var(y) = p2 E(x2)2 and so
p
var(x) var(y) = p E(x2) = cov(x, y). That’s the
largest the covariance can get. So if we want a standardized measure of associate, the correlation,
we divide the covariance by this maximum value, which gives us the usual definition of a correlation
coefficient, ρxy = cov(x, y)/
p
var(x) var(y). Solve this equation for cov(x, y) and you get cov(x, y) =
p
var(x) var(y)ρxy. Whew. All of this is just to show that the applied statistics usage of covariance as
cov(x, y) = σxσyρxy is as justified as it is convenient.
14.1.2. Simulate observations. We’re almost done simulating. What we did above was sim-
ulate individual cafés and their average properties. Now all that remains is to simulate our
robot visiting these cafés and collecting data. The code below simulates 10 visits to each café,
5 in the morning and 5 in the afternoon. The robot records the wait time during each visit.
Then it combines all of the visits into a common data frame.
