12.3. ORDERED CATEGORICAL OUTCOMES
393
The conventional solution is to use a cumulative link function.180 The cumulative
probability of a value is the probability of that value or any smaller value. In the context of
ordered categories, the cumulative probability of 3 is the sum of the probabilities of 3, 2, and
1. Ordered categories by convention begin at 1, so a result less than 1 has no probability at all.
By linking a linear model to cumulative probability, it is possible to guarantee the ordering
of the outcomes.
I’ll explain why in two steps. Step 1 is to explain how to parameterize a distribution of
outcomes on the scale of log-cumulative-odds. Step 2 is to introduce a predictor (or more
than one predictor) to these log-cumulative-odds values, allowing you to model associations
between predictors and the outcome while obeying the ordered nature of prediction.
Both steps will unfold in context of a data example, to make the discussion more con-
crete. So next you meet some data.
12.3.1. Example: Moral intuition. The data for this example come from a series of experi-
ments conducted by philosophers.181 Yes, philosophers do sometimes conduct experiments.
In this case, the experiments aim to collect empirical evidence relevant to debates about
moral intuition, the forms of reasoning through which people develop judgments about the
moral goodness and badness of actions. These debates are relevant to all of the social sci-
ences, because they touch on broader issues of reasoning, the role of emotions in decision
making, and theories of moral development, both in individuals and groups.
These experiments get measurements of moral judgment by using scenarios known as
“trolley problems.” The classic version invokes a runaway trolley, but what these scenarios
share is that they have proved vexing or paradoxical to moral philosophers. Here’s a tradi-
tional example, using a “boxcar” in place of a “trolley”:
Standing by the railroad tracks, Dennis sees an empty, out-of-control boxcar about
to hit five people. Next to Dennis is a lever that can be pulled, sending the boxcar
down a side track and away from the five people. But pulling the lever will also
lower the railing on a footbridge spanning the side track, causing one person to fall
off the footbridge and onto the side track, where he will be hit by the boxcar. If
Dennis pulls the lever the boxcar will switch tracks and not hit the five people, and
the one person to fall and be hit by the boxcar. If Dennis does not pull the lever the
boxcar will continue down the tracks and hit five people, and the one person will
remain safe above the side track.
How morally permissible is it for Dennis to pull the lever?
The reason these scenarios can be philosophically vexing is that the analytical content of
two scenarios can be identical, and yet people reliably reach different judgments about the
moral permissibility of the same action in the different scenarios. Before you jump to the
conclusion that this stuff is silly, the moral intuitions people have in these experiments are
similar to the reactions they have to laws and how behavior is classified as criminal or not.
The law is full of moral paradoxes. We need to understand them.
Previous research has lead to at least three important principles of unconscious reason-
ing that may explain variations in judgment. These principles are:
The action principle: Harm caused by action is morally worse than equivalent harm
caused by omission.
The intention principle: Harm intended as the means to a goal is morally worse than
equivalent harm foreseen as the side effect of a goal.
The contact principle: Using physical contact to cause harm to a victim is morally
worse than causing equivalent harm to a victim without using physical contact.
