422
13. MODELS WITH MEMORY
such cases, the trace plot for the variance parameters may swing around over very large values. It
can do this, because the exponential prior has a long tail. Such large values are typically a priori im-
possible. Often, the chain will still sample validly, but it might be highly inefficient, exhibiting small
n_eff values and possibly many divergent transitions.
To improve such a model, instead of using exponential priors for the variance components, you
can use half-Normal priors or some other prior with a thin tail. A half-Normal is a Normal distribu-
tion with all mass above zero. It is just cut off below zero. For example:
Si ∼Binomial(Ni, pi)
logit(pi) = αtank[i]
αj ∼Normal(¯α, σ)
α ∼Normal(0, 1.5)
σ ∼Half-Normal(0, 1)
Inside an ulam formula, you’d use dhalfnorm. Inside a Stan model, you just assign a lower bound to
the parameter of lower=0.
13.2. Varying effects and the underfitting/overfitting trade-off
Varying intercepts are just regularized estimates, but adaptively regularized by estimat-
ing how diverse the clusters are while estimating the features of each cluster. This fact is not
easy to grasp, so if it still seems mysterious, this section aims to further relate the properties
of multilevel estimates to the foundational underfitting/overfitting dilemma from Chapter 7.
A major benefit of using varying effects estimates, instead of the empirical raw estimates,
is that they provide more accurate estimates of the individual cluster (tank) intercepts.191 On
average, the varying effects actually provide a better estimate of the individual tank (cluster)
means. The reason that the varying intercepts provide better estimates is that they do a better
job of trading off underfitting and overfitting.
To understand this in the context of the reed frog example, suppose that instead of exper-
imental tanks we had natural ponds, so that we might be concerned with making predictions
for the same clusters in the future. We’ll approach the problem of predicting future survival
in these ponds, from three perspectives:
(1) Complete pooling. This means we assume that the population of ponds is invariant,
the same as estimating a common intercept for all ponds.
(2) No pooling. This means we assume that each pond tells us nothing about any other
pond. This is the model with amnesia.
(3) Partial pooling. This means using an adaptive regularizing prior, as in the previous
section.
First, suppose you ignore the varying intercepts and just use the overall mean across all
ponds, α, to make your predictions for each pond. A lot of data contributes to your estimate
of α, and so it can be quite precise. However, your estimate of α is unlikely to exactly match
the mean of any particular pond. As a result, the total sample mean underfits the data. This
is the complete pooling approach, pooling the data from all ponds to produce a single
estimate that is applied to every pond. This sort of model is equivalent to assuming that the
variation among ponds is zero—all ponds are identical.
Second, suppose you use the survival proportions for each pond to make predictions.
This means using a separate intercept for each pond. The blue points in Figure 13.1 are this
same kind of estimate. In each particular pond, quite little data contributes to each estimate,
