13.1. EXAMPLE: MULTILEVEL TADPOLES
421
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
log-odds survive
Density
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
probability survive
Density
Figure 13.2. The inferred population of survival across tanks. Left: 100
Gaussian distributions of the log-odds of survival, sampled from the poste-
rior of m13.2. Right: Survival probabilities for 8000 new simulated tanks,
averaging over the posterior distribution on the left.
# transform to probability and visualize
dens( inv_logit(sim_tanks) , lwd=2 , adj=0.1 )
The results are displayed in Figure 13.2. Notice that there is uncertainty about both the
location, α, and scale, σ, of the population distribution of log-odds of survival. All of this
uncertainty is propagated into the simulated probabilities of survival.
Rethinking: Varying intercepts as over-dispersion. In the previous chapter (page 381), the beta-
binomial and gamma-Poisson models were presented as ways for coping with over-dispersion
of count data. Varying intercepts accomplish the same thing, allowing count outcomes to be over-
dispersed. They accomplish this, because when each observed count gets its own unique intercept, but
these intercepts are pooled through a common distribution, the predictions expect over-dispersion
just like a beta-binomial or gamma-Poisson model would. Compared to a beta-binomial or gamma-
Poisson model, a binomial or Poisson model with a varying intercept on every observed outcome will
often be easier to estimate and easier to extend. There will be an example of this approach, later in
this chapter.
Overthinking: Priors for variance components. The examples in this book use weakly regularizing
exponential priors for variance components, the σ parameters that estimate the variation across clus-
ters in the data. These exponential priors work very well in routine multilevel modeling. They express
only a rough notion of an average standard deviation and regularize towards zero. But there are two
common contexts in which they can be problematic. First, sometimes there isn’t much information
in the data with which to estimate the variance. For example, if you only have 5 clusters, then that’s
something like trying to estimate a variance with 5 data points. In that case, you might need some-
thing much more informative. Second, in non-linear models with logit and log links, floor and ceiling
effects sometimes render extreme values of the variance equally plausible as more realistic values. In
