534
15. MISSING DATA AND OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
15E1. Rewrite the Oceanic tools model (from Chapter 11) below so that it assumes measured error
on the log population sizes of each society. You don’t need to fit the model to data. Just modify the
mathematical formula below.
Ti ∼Poisson(µi)
log µi = α + β log Pi
α ∼Normal(0, 1.5)
β ∼Normal(0, 1)
15E2. Rewrite the same model so that it allows imputation of missing values for log population.
There aren’t any missing values in the variable, but you can still write down a model formula that
would imply imputation, if any values were missing.
Medium.
15M1. Using the mathematical form of the imputation model in the chapter, explain what is being
assumed about how the missing values were generated.
15M2. In earlier chapters, we threw away cases from the primate milk data, so we could use the
neocortex variable. Now repeat the WAIC model comparison example from Chapter 6, but use im-
putation on the neocortex variable so that you can include all of the cases in the original data. The
simplest form of imputation is acceptable. How are the model comparison results affected by being
able to include all of the cases?
15M3. Repeat the divorce data measurement error models, but this time double the standard errors.
Can you explain how doubling the standard errors impacts inference?
Hard.
15H1. The data in data(elephants) are counts of matings observed for bull elephants of differing
ages. There is a strong positive relationship between age and matings. However, age is not always
assessed accurately. First, fit a Poisson model predicting MATINGS with AGE as a predictor. Second,
assume that the observed AGE values are uncertain and have a standard error of ±5 years. Re-estimate
the relationship between MATINGS and AGE, incorporating this measurement error. Compare the
inferences of the two models.
15H2. Repeat the model fitting problem above, now increasing the assumed standard error on AGE.
How large does the standard error have to get before the posterior mean for the coefficient on AGE
reaches zero?
15H3. The fact that information flows in all directions among parameters sometimes leads to rather
unintuitive conclusions. Here’s an example from missing data imputation, in which imputation of a
single datum reverses the direction of an inferred relationship. Use these data:
R code
15.32
set.seed(100)
x <- c( rnorm(10) , NA )
y <- c( rnorm(10,x) , 100 )
d <- list(x=x,y=y)
