492
14. ADVENTURES IN COVARIANCE
confounds. This depends upon having both a good phylogeny and a good model of the rela-
tionship between phylogenetic distance and trait evolution. Neither is a trivial problem. But
the approach is justified in theory, if not always possible in practice.
It will help to draw this approach and then use it in an actual model.
B
G
M
P
U
There’s a lot going on here, but we can take it one piece at a time. Again, we’re interested in
G →B. There is one confound we know for sure, body mass (M). It possibly influences both
G and B. So we’ll include that in the model. The unobserved confounds U could potentially
influence all three variables. Finally, we let the phylogenetic relationships (P) influence U.
How is P causal? If we traveled back in time and delayed a split between two species, it could
influence the expected differences in their traits. So it is really the timing of the split that is
causal, not the phylogeny. Of course P may also influence G and B and M directly. But those
arrows aren’t our concern right now, so I’ve omitted them for clarity.
We want to be sure any association between group size G and brain size B is not through a
backdoor. As always, we look for all the paths between G and B, identify which are backdoors,
and consider if there are any methods for closing the backdoor paths. In the DAG above,
there are backdoor paths through M and through U. We can condition on M to block that
confound. But we can’t condition on U. But if we can use P to somehow reconstruct the
covariation that U induces between G and B, that could be enough.
That’s the strategy. Now implementing that strategy is famously hard. GLMs that try to
include phylogenetic distance often go by the name phylogenetic regression. The orig-
inal phylogenetic regression approach treats phylogenetic distance in a highly constrained
and unrealistic way, based on a neutral model of divergence with time.207 There are many
variants. But all of them use some function of phylogenetic distance to model the covari-
ation among species. So learning the basic phylogenetic regression model helps bootstrap
your understanding, even though you really should use something better in your own anal-
yses. After introducing the basic phylogenetic regression, I’ll show you how to more flexibly
model phylogenetic distance. There is no universally correct function that maps phylogeny
onto the confounds that matter. So flexibility is needed.
To begin, load the primates data and its phylogeny as well:
R code
14.47
library(rethinking)
data(Primates301)
data(Primates301_nex)
# plot it using ape package - install.packages('ape') if needed
library(ape)
plot( ladderize(Primates301_nex) , type="fan" , font=1 , no.margin=TRUE ,
label.offset=1 , cex=0.5 )
