546
16. GENERALIZED LINEAR MADNESS
data, conditional on assuming a specific strategy s. For example assuming s = 1, the majority
strategy, then Pr(yi = 2|s = 1) = 1. This is just the mathy way of saying that a child using
the majority strategy always follows the majority color choice.
We don’t know s though. We can’t observe it directly. However we do have a probability
for each s in the model. These are the elements of the simplex p. So to get the unconditional
probability of the data Pr(yi) we just need to use p to average over the unknown strategy s:
Pr(yi) =
5
X
s=1
ps Pr(yi|s)
Read this as the probability of yi is the weighted average of the probabilities of yi conditional on
each strategy s. This expression is a mixture, as in earlier chapters. Sometimes you’ll read that
this marginalizes out the unknown strategy. This just means averaging over the strategies,
using some probability of each to get the weight of each in the average. Above, the values in
p provide these weights.
Okay, so we have our statistical model now. Let’s write it in a more conventional form:
yi ∼Categorical(θ)
θj =
5
X
s=1
ps Pr(j|s)
for j = 1...3
p ∼Dirichlet([4, 4, 4, 4, 4])
The vector θ holds the average probability of each behavior, conditional on p. As a generative
model, the above implies that all children are identical—each child on each trial has some
probability ps of using strategy s. Of course there are individual differences among the chil-
dren. But since we don’t have any repeat observations of each child in these data, we can’t
do much better than the above. But if we did have repeat observations, we’d assign a unique
simplex p to each child, power up the partial pooling, and enjoy the fireworks.
16.2.3. Coding the statistical model. Coding this model means explicitly coding the logic
of each strategy, those Pr(j|s) terms above. We will write this model directly in Stan, because
it will actually make it both easier to code and easier to extend. There have been some op-
tional Stan models in previous chapters. But now it’s not optional. I’ve included the model
code in the rethinking package. You can load and display it with:
R code
16.7
data(Boxes_model)
cat(Boxes_model)
I’ll put the explanation of the Stan code in the Overthinking box further down, so you can
focus on the coding details later.
To run the sampler, all that remains is to prepare the data list and then invoke stan().
The data list needs only the sample size N, the vector of choices y, and the vector of presenta-
tion order majority_first.
R code
16.8
# prep data
dat_list <- list(
N = nrow(Boxes),
y = Boxes$y,
