14.5. CONTINUOUS CATEGORIES AND THE GAUSSIAN PROCESS
491
14.5.2. Example: Phylogenetic distance. Species, like islands, are more or less distance
from one another. However their distance is not physical but rather temporal—how long
since a common ancestor? Evolutionary biologists investigate how phylogenetic relation-
ships influence patterns of variation in the bodies and brains of different species. It’s a fact
that species with more recent common ancestors have higher trait correlations. Do these
correlations matter?
Phylogenetic distance can have two important causal influences. The first is that two
species that only recently separated tend to be more similar, assuming their traits are not
maintained by selection but rather drifting neutrally around. The second causal influence
is indirect. Phylogenetic distance is a proxy for unobserved variables that generate covaria-
tion among species, even when selection matters. Closely related species likely share more
of these, but distantly related species share many fewer. For example, all mammals nurse
their young with milk. Flight in birds similarly influences many traits. These discrete, life
history altering traits can have strong causal influence on other traits. When not observed,
phylogenetic distance is a potentially useful proxy for these variables. But only if the trait
model captures the right details.206 These methods do not just work automatically, as they
are too often ritually presented in journals.
Consider as an example the causal influence of group size (G) on brain size (B). Hypothe-
ses connecting these variables are popular, because primates (including humans) are unusual
in both. Most primates live in social groups. Most mammals do not. Second, primates have
relatively large brains. There is a family of hypotheses linking these two features. Suppose
for example that group living, whatever its cause, could select for larger brains, because once
you live with others, a larger brain helps to cope with the complexity of cooperation and
manipulation. This hypothesis implies a causal time series. Let’s draw it:
B1
B2
G1
G2
U1
U2
The subscripts are time points in the evolutionary history of different populations. So G1 and
group size at time 1 and G2 is group size in the next time point. There are plausibly many
potential confounds, shown here as U1 and U2. Each variable influences itself in the next time
step, as you might expect in anevolving system. There is also a causal influencesof G1 on B2—
a species’ recent group size influenced its current brain size. This is what we’d like to estimate.
However the confounds U1 also possibly influence everything. As in previous examples,
circled variables are unobserved. So we can’t just condition on U1 to block confounding. We
also don’t even have G1 to use in a model, but only its descendant G2. But note that if we did
have measurements of G1 and U1, we could use these and not worry at all about phylogeny.
Since we haven’t observed the past, we need some way to estimate its influence. This
is where the branching history of the species might help. Phylogeny is associated with the
patterns of covariation across species, because recently diverged species tend to be more sim-
ilar. So phylogenetic relationships, expressed as distance, can be used to partially reconstruct
