540
16. GENERALIZED LINEAR MADNESS
above, I’ve assigned this median to be the cylinder function. Finally, we need priors for the
three parameters k, p, and σ.
One of the major advantages of having a scientifically inspired model is that the param-
eters have meanings. These meanings constitute prior information that we can use to chose
informative distributions. This is especially useful in these contexts, because often there are
more scientifically-required parameters than can be directly identified by the data. We can
nevertheless do useful estimation, given some scientific constraints on the parameters. That
is the case in this example.
The first thing to notice about the parameters k and p is that they are multiplied in the
model and the data have no way to estimate anything except their product. The technical
way this problem could be described is that k and p, given this model and these data, are not
identifiable. We could just replace the product kp2 with a new parameter θ and estimate
that instead. Like this:
exp(µi) = πθh3
i
We’ll get the same predictions. What we won’t get is an easy way to assign a prior to θ. So
even if we are going to use θ = kp2 trick, we’ll need to think still about k and p.
Let’s think about the parameter p. It is the ratio of the radius to the height, p = r/h. So
it must be greater than zero. It must also be less than one, because few people are wider than
they are tall. It is almost certainly less than one-half, because a person as wide as they are
tall would have 2r = h, making p = (h/2)/h = 0.5. So p is probably much less than 0.5.
Putting all of this together, what we want is a distribution bounded between zero and one
with most of the prior mass below 0.5. A beta distribution will do:
p ∼Beta(2, 18)
This prior will have mean 2/(2 + 18) = 0.1. We really need to do some prior predictive
simulations to do better (see the practice problems at the end of this chapter). But that takes
care of p for the moment.
The parameter k is the proportion of volume that is weight. It really just translates mea-
surement scales, because changing the units of volume or weight will change its value. For
example, if height is measured in centimeters and weight is measured in kilograms, then
volume has units cm3, and so k must have units kg/cm3. The definition of k, in that case, is
just how many kilograms there are per cubic centimeter. So to scale the prior right, we need
to have some information about how heavy a cubic centimeter of person is. We could look
that up, or maybe use our own bodies to get a prior.
Rethinking: Priors are never arbitrary. It’s commonplace to hear the fearful claim that Bayes is
untrustworthy because priors are arbitrary. It is true that people sometimes treat priors that way. But
priors are only arbitrary when scientists ignore domain knowledge. Even when we stick with GLMs,
prior predictive simulations force us to engage with background knowledge to produce useful, non-
arbitrary priors. When we have a more scientifically grounded model, the parameters have even
more meaning. The p and k parameters in the cylinder example have scientific meanings that let us
assign priors that could even be measured physically. Using flat priors in this example, out of some
metaphysical commitment to ignorance, would be a mistake.
