16 Generalized Linear Madness
When I asked my high school physics teacher about statistics, she told me a joke. Here’s
how I remember it. A physicist, an engineer, and a statistician go bow hunting together. After
many hours, they spot a deer in the distance. The physicist does a quick ballistic calculation,
ignoring air resistance. The arrow flies true but falls a few meters short of the target. The
deer doesn’t notice. The engineer smirks, introduces a fudge factor for air resistance, and
shoots. The second arrow lands instead a few meters long. The deer still doesn’t notice. The
statistician takes the average and yells, “We got it!”
The sciences construct theories of natural processes. Eventually these theories are ex-
pressed formally, as mathematical models. Such models are specialized, make precise pre-
dictions, and can fail in equally precise ways. Being wrong in precise ways is useful, because
the failures borrow meaning from the cause and effect relationships built into the models.
This is true of the physicist and the engineer in the joke. They were wrong in very precise
ways that give us hints about which causes were at fault.
Applied statistics has to apply to all the sciences, and so it is often much vaguer about
models. Instead it focuses on average performance, regardless of the model. The generalized
linear models in the preceding chapters are not credible scientific models of most natural
processes. They are powerful, geocentric (Chapter 4) descriptions of associations. In combi-
nation with a logic of causal inference, for example DAGs and do-calculus, generalized linear
models can nevertheless be unreasonably powerful.
But there are problems with this GLMs-plus-DAGs approach. Not everything can be
modeled as a GLM—a linear combination of variables mapped onto a non-linear outcome.
But if it is the only approach you know, then you have to use it. Other times the theory of
interest can be expressed as a GLM, but the theory implies that some of the parameters are
fixed at special values. We might never notice, if we start with GLMs instead of real models.
And when a GLM fails, it’s not easy to learn from the failure. Debugging epicycles is a game
no one can win. If we could replace the heuristic DAG with an actual structural causal model,
we might solve all these problems at once.
In this chapter, I will go beyond generalized linear madness. I’ll work through
examples in which the scientific context provides a causal model that will breathe life into the
statistical model. I’ve chosen examples which are individually distinct and highlight different
challenges in developing and translating causal models into bespoke (see the Rethinking box
below) statistical models. You won’t require any specialized scientific expertise to grasp these
examples. And the basic strategy is the same as it has been from the start: Define a generative
model of a phenomenon and then use that model to design strategies for causal inference and
statistical estimation.
537
