518
15. MISSING DATA AND OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
distribution for each missing value. Conceptually this is like the measurement error case—if
we don’t know something, we condition it on what we know and let Bayes figure it out.
In our case, the variable with missing values is neocortex percent. Again, we’ll call it B,
for “brain”:
B = [0.55, B2, B3, B4, 0.65, 0.65, ..., 0.76, 0.75]
For every index i at which there is a missing value, there is also a parameter Bi that will form
a posterior distribution for it. The simplest model will simply impute B from its own normal
distribution. Here it is, with the neocortex pieces in blue:
Ki ∼Normal(µi, σ)
[distribution for outcome k]
µi = α + βBBi + βM log Mi
[linear model]
Bi ∼Normal(ν, σB)
[distribution for obs/missing B]
α ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
βB ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
βM ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
σ ∼Exponential(1)
ν ∼Normal(0.5, 1)
σB ∼Exponential(1)
This model ignores that B and M are associated through U. But let’s start with this model, just
to keep things simple. The interpretation of Bi ∼Normal(ν, σB) is awkward at first. Note
that when Bi is observed, then this line is a likelihood, just like any old linear regression.
The model learns the distributions of ν and σB that are consistent with the data. But when
Bi is missing and therefore a parameter, that same line is interpreted as a prior. Since the
parameters ν and σB are also estimated, the prior is learned from thedata, just likethe varying
effects in previous chapters.
One issue with this model is that it assumes each B value has a standardized Gaussian
uncertainty. But we know that these values are bounded between zero and one, because they
are proportions. So it is possible to do a little better. In the practice problems at the end of
the chapter, you’ll see how. But keep in mind that assigning a Gaussian distribution doesn’t
really mean that the frequency distribution of the variable is a bell curve. It just means we
will use only the mean and variance to describe it. The Gaussian is a very conservative choice,
because it is the flattest unbounded distribution with a given variance (Chapter 10). But as
described way back in Chapter 7, if you have reason to suspect the tails of the distribution
are thick, then definitely do not use a Gaussian distribution.
Implementing an imputation model can be done several different ways. All of the ways
are a little awkward, because the locations of missing values have to respected, and that means
plenty of index management. The approach I’ll use here hews closely to the discussion just
above: We’ll merge the observed values and parameters into a vector that we’ll use as “data”
in the regression. For convenience, ulam can automate this merging. The Overthinking box
at the end of this section presents a full implementation in raw Stan code.
To fit the model with ulam, first get the data loaded and transform the predictors:
R code
15.16
library(rethinking)
data(milk)
