17. HOROSCOPES
567
(4) Quality of data analysis: The topic of this book, but still much broader than it has
indicated. Many common practices in the sciences exacerbate false discovery.240 If
you are not designing your analysis before you see the data, then your analysis may
overfit the data in ways that regularization cannot reliably address.
(5) Quality of peer review: Good pre-publication peer review is invaluable. But much
of it is not so good. Many mistakes get through, and many brilliant papers do not.
Peer review selects for hyperbole, since honestly admitting limitations of work only
hurts a paper’s chances. Is this nevertheless the best system we can devise? Let’s
hope not.
(6) Publication: We agonize over bias in measurement and statistical analysis, but then
allow it all back in during publication.241 Incentives for positive findings and news-
worthy results distort the design of research and how it is summarized.242
(7) Post-publication peer review: What happens to a finding after publication is just
as important as what happens before. It is common for invalid analyses to be pub-
lished in top-tier journals, only to be torn apart on blogs.243 But there is no system
for linking published papers to later peer criticism, and there are few formal incen-
tives to conduct it. Even retracted papers continue to be cited.
(8) Replication and meta-analysis: The most important aspects of science are repeti-
tion and synthesis.244 No single study is definitive, but incentives to replicate and
summarize are weaker than incentives to produce novel findings. Top-tier journals
prioritize news.
We tend to focus on the statistical analysis, perhaps because it is the only piece for which we
have formulas and theorems. But every piece deserves attention and improvement. Sadly,
many pieces are not under individual control, so social solutions are needed.
But there is an aspect of science that you do personally control: openness. Pre-plan your
research together with the statistical analysis. Doing so will improve both the research design
and the statistics. Document it in the form of a mock analysis that you would not be ashamed
to share with a colleague. Register it publicly, perhaps in a simple repository, like Github or
any other. But your webpage will do just fine, as well. Then collect the data. Then analyze
the data as planned. If you must change the plan, that’s fine. But document the changes and
justify them. Provide all of the data and scripts necessary to repeat your analysis. Do not
provide scripts and data “on request,” but rather put them online so reviewers of your paper
can access them without your interaction. There are of course cases in which full data cannot
be released, due to privacy concerns. But the bulk of science is not of that sort.
The data and its analysis are the scientific product. The paper is just an advertisement.
If you do your honest best to design, conduct, and document your research, so that others
can build directly upon it, you can make a difference.
Rethinking: Statistics is to math as cooking is to chemistry. In a uniquely valuable essay,245 Terry
Speed stated that “statistics is no closer to mathematics than cooking is to chemistry.” What this means
is that while each field has a basis in another, each is sufficiently abstracted from its base to make its
practice mostly depend upon other factors. In cooking, abstract heuristics are more useful than the
chemical laws that explain them, and human psychology and culture can dominate. In statistics,
context is king. General mathematical considerations always matter, but mathematical foundations
solve few, if any, of the contingent problems that we confront in the context of a study.
