16.4. POPULATION DYNAMICS
553
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
age
nuts per second
0
4
8
12
16
Figure 16.5. Posterior predictive distribu-
tion for the nut opening model. Blue points
are raw data, number opened divided by sec-
onds. Point size is proportional to the dura-
tion of that observation. The curves are 30
draws from the posterior distribution.
16.3.3. Covariates and individual differences. The model here is stupidly simple. But it
is a scientifically reasonable start. You could extend it to include covariates like sex and
individual differences in strength. There are repeat observations of individuals, and even
repeat observations across different years, that could be used to estimate individual varying
effects. The practice problems at the end of the chapter explore these applications.
Note for the moment that some of the model parameters make sense as varying by indi-
vidual while others do not. The scaling parameter θ for example is a feature of the physics,
not of an individual. Which parameters are allowed to vary by individual is something to
be decided by scientific knowledge of the parameters. And this is another reason to avoid
GLMs, so that the parameters have firmer scientific meaning.
Yet another improvement to this model might be to use a more realistic model of chim-
panzee growth. There are detailed published growth curves for chimpanzees.225 Male chim-
panzees do experience a growth spurt around age 10. So their growth rate actually increases
shortly before reaching maximum size. Incorporating this into the model might help im-
prove predictions for males at least.
16.4. Population dynamics
It all starts with radiation released by fusion reactions inside a dwarf star in a minor arm
of an insignificant spiral galaxy. Eight minutes away as the photon travels, on the third planet,
that radiation allows clever plants to make sugar. Then the hare eats those clever plants and
steals their sugar. The clever lynx eats the hare. Everyone is just eating starlight.
The population of hares and lynx fluctuate over time, and understanding nature requires
understanding such fluctuations. The numbers of hares and lynx at any time influence the
numbers in the near future. You might say that the most important cause of hares is hares.
But predators, like the lynx, are also causes. To model phenomena like this, variables at one
time influence the values of those same variables in the next.
In this section, we’ll model a time series of hare and lynx populations.226 Load the data
and display it:
