15.2. MISSING DATA
525
Religion is a human universal, as common among human societies as walking on two
legs and naming stars. Anthropologists, archaeologists, and scholars of religion are some-
times curious about the impact of religious beliefs on the welfare of human societies. Some
of the most successful religious traditions involve gods (and other supernatural entities) that
enforce moral norms. For example, in the Abrahamic traditions, God punishes the wicked
and rewards the just. Such gods might be called “moralizing gods.” In other traditions, gods
behave in their own self-interest, with no interest in encouraging humans to cooperate with
one another. Does such a difference in belief have any consequences for the society? For ex-
ample, if people who believe in a moralizing god are better at cooperating with one another,
then maybe societies that believe in moralizing gods grow faster and tend to replace societies
with less moralizing gods.
Let’s look at a set of historical data that was used to evaluate this idea.217
R code
15.24
data(Moralizing_gods)
str(Moralizing_gods)
'data.frame': 864 obs. of
5 variables:
$ polity
: Factor w/ 30 levels "Big Island Hawaii",..: 1 1 1 1 1 1 ...
$ year
: int
1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 -600 ...
$ population
: num
3.73 3.73 3.6 4.03 4.31 ...
$ moralizing_gods: int
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 1 NA ...
$ writing
: int
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ...
These data are population sizes (on the log scale) of different regions (polity) in differ-
ent centuries (year). The key explanatory variable is moralizing_gods, which indicates
whether members of a society believed in supernatural enforcement of morality (1), did not
believe (0), or there is insufficient evidence for assigning a value (NA). This last value (NA)
is usually associated with lack of any written evidence about religious belief. There is also an
indicator variable for literacy (writing).
Does belief in moralizing gods increase the rate of population growth? This is a difficult
causal query. There are plausibly many unobserved confounds that could produce a non-
causal association between population growth rate and the content of religious traditions.
And belief in moralizing gods may not produce an immediately detectable increase in pop-
ulation. Instead the causal effect could work over long time periods or only during periods
of conflict or ecological stress. Minimally, what we need is some comparison of popula-
tion growth rates before and after each society adopts moralizing gods. This is not a causal
identification strategy that does anything about confounds—the appearance of moralizing
gods and larger populations could still be driven by other (unmeasured) variables. There is
no sense in which we can think of the year that moralizing gods appear as being a random
treatment, in the sense of a regression discontinuity (Chapter 14, page ??). But if we
playfully assume that there are no confounds, how should we go about this analysis?
The first obstacle is that there are a lot of missing values in the moralizing_gods vari-
able. This prevents us from knowing exactly when (if ever) each society adopts belief in
moralizing gods. How many values are missing? Let’s count:
R code
15.25
table( Moralizing_gods$moralizing_gods , useNA="always" )
0
1 <NA>
17
319
528
