500
14. ADVENTURES IN COVARIANCE
14M4. Use WAIC to compare the Gaussian process model of Oceanic tools to the models fit to the
same data in Chapter 11. Pay special attention to the effective numbers of parameters, as estimated
by WAIC.
14M5. Modify the phylogenetic distance example to use group size as the outcome and brain size as
a predictor. Assuming brain size influences group size, what is your estimate of the effect? How does
phylogeny influence the estimate?
Hard.
14H1. Let’s revisit the Bangladesh fertility data, data(bangladesh), from the practice problems for
Chapter 13. Fit a model with both varying intercepts by district_id and varying slopes of urban
by district_id. You are still predicting use.contraception. Inspect the correlation between the
intercepts and slopes. Can you interpret this correlation, in terms of what it tells you about the pattern
of contraceptive use in the sample? It might help to plot the mean (or median) varying effect estimates
for both the intercepts and slopes, by district. Then you can visualize the correlation and maybe more
easily think through what it means to have a particular correlation. Plotting predicted proportion of
women using contraception, with urban women on one axis and rural on the other, might also help.
14H2. Varying effects models are useful for modeling time series, as well as spatial clustering. In a
time series, the observations cluster by entities that have continuity through time, such as individuals.
Since observations within individuals are likely highly correlated, the multilevel structure can help
quite a lot. You’ll use the data in data(Oxboys), which is 234 height measurements on 26 boys from
an Oxford Boys Club (I think these were like youth athletic leagues?), at 9 different ages (centered and
standardized) per boy. You’ll be interested in predicting height, using age, clustered by Subject
(individual boy).
Fit a model with varying intercepts and slopes (on age), clustered by Subject. Present and in-
terpret the parameter estimates. Which varying effect contributes more variation to the heights, the
intercept or the slope?
14H3. Now consider the correlation between the varying intercepts and slopes. Can you explain its
value? How would this estimated correlation influence your predictions about a new sample of boys?
14H4. Use mvrnorm (in library(MASS)) or rmvnorm (in library(mvtnorm)) to simulate a new
sample of boys, based upon the posterior mean values of the parameters. That is, try to simulate
varying intercepts and slopes, using the relevant parameter estimates, and then plot the predicted
trends of height on age, one trend for each simulated boy you produce. A sample of 10 simulated
boys is plenty, to illustrate the lesson. You can ignore uncertainty in the posterior, just to make the
problem a little easier. But if you want to include the uncertainty about the parameters, go for it.
Note that you can construct an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix to pass to either mvrnorm
or rmvnorm with something like:
R code
14.54
S <- matrix( c( sa^2 , sa*sb*rho , sa*sb*rho , sb^2 ) , nrow=2 )
where sa is the standard deviation of the first variable, sb is the standard deviation of the second
variable, and rho is the correlation between them.
