538
16. GENERALIZED LINEAR MADNESS
Unlike the other chapters in this book, there is some mathematics in this chapter, and it
really cannot be avoided. But all you need is some algebra. We won’t so much do math as
express ideas with math. We will also work directly with Stan model code, since ulam() is
not flexible enough for some of the examples. If you aren’t interested in the code, you can
ignore it. But as usual, seeing the implementation often helps to clarify the concepts.
Rethinking: Bespoken for. Mass production has some advantages, but it also makes our clothes fit
badly. Garments bought off-the-shelf are not manufactured with you in mind. They are not bespoke
products, designed for any particular person with a particular body. Unless you are lucky to have a
perfectly average body shape, you will need a tailor to get better.
Statistical analyses are similar. Generalized linear models are off-the-shelf products, mass pro-
duced for a consumer market of impatient researchers with diverse goals. Science asked statisticians
for tools that could be used anywhere. And so they delivered. But the clothes don’t always fit.
One problem with off-the-shelf models is that they interrupt expertise. A typical researcher
knows a lot about their subject. Evidence of this is the detailed objections a scientist makes when
someone from another specialty tries to build a theoretical model for their subject. But then when
those scientists turn to analyze their own data, they use tools that forbid the use of that knowledge.
There is no way in a standard GLM to incorporate it. Even worse, if the only models researchers are
ever taught are GLMs (or GLMMs), these models may crowd out the formation of informed, bespoke
scientific models.
GLMs are unreasonably powerful. But we should remember that they are usually only geocentric
devices. Better bespoke models are eventually necessary, both for better fit and better inference.
16.1. Geometric people
Back in Chapter 4, you met linear regression in the context of building a predictive model
of height using weight. You even saw how to measure non-linear associations between the
two variables. But nothing in that example was scientifically satisfying. The height-weight
model was just a statistical device. It contains no biological information and tells us noth-
ing about how the association between height and weight arises. Consider for example that
weight obviously does not cause height, at least not in humans. If anything, the causal rela-
tionship is the reverse.
So now let’s try to do better. Why? Because when the model is scientifically inspired,
rather than just statistical required, disagreements between model and data are informative
of real causal relationships.
Suppose for example that a person is shaped like a cylinder. Of course a person isn’t
exactly shaped like a cylinder. There are arms and a head. But let’s see how far this cylinder
model gets us. The weight of the cylinder is a consequence of the volume of the cylinder.
And the volume of the cylinder is a consequence of growth in the height and width of the
cylinder. So if we can relate the height to the volume, then we’d have a model to predict
weight from height.
16.1.1. The scientificmodel. Let’s do it. Sometime a long time ago you learned, and sensibly
forgot, that the formula for the volume of a person-cylinder is:
V = πr2h
where r is the person’s radius and h is its height. See Figure 16.1.219 We don’t know each
individual’s radius, but let’s assume that each individual’s radius is some constant proportion
