15.2. MISSING DATA
517
In all three DAGs above, the variable B is circled now to indicate that it in unobserved. Each
DAG is a different hypothesis about what causes the missing brain values RB. Let’s consider
each, going from left to right.
On the left, nothing influences RB. It is completely random. In this case, there is no
new non-causal path introduced. Dropping the species with missing brain values wastes
information—it means dropping all the observed mass values too—but it doesn’t necessarily
bias inference.
In the middle, now body mass M influences which species have missing values. This
could happen, for example, if smaller primates like lemurs are less often studied than larger
primates like gorillas. If M influences RB, it also creates a new non-causal path B∗←RB ←
M →K. But luckily conditioning on M blocks this path, and we want to condition on M
anyway. We still want to impute missing values, so that we don’t throw away information.
How do we know if M influences RB? You could test this idea by trying to measure the
causal influence of M on RB. But keep in mind that all that backdoor path stuff still applies.
In a practice problem at the end of this chapter, I’ll ask you to estimate the causal influence
of M on RB.
The third example DAG, on the right, shows brain size B itself influencing RB. This could
happen because anthropologists are more interested in large brained species. There is a lot
more research on chimpanzees, for example, than on lemurs. This scenario is awful. If true,
it means that estimation of B →K will be biased by a non-causal path through RB. It will
also not be possible to test, with these data, whether B influences RB. Lots of different graphs
can lead to this scenario. Here’s another possibility:
B*
B
K
M
RB
U
V
Now it isn’t the B values themselves that produce missingness. Rather there is an unobserved
variable V that influences both B and RB. V could be for example phylogenetic similarity
to humans. Humans have an unreasonable amount of neocortex—that is reason we pay
attention to it—and other primates closely related to us also tend to have more neocortex.
If those primates are studied more intensely, B values will be missing more as distance from
humans increases. Just about the only hope in this scenario is the have detailed knowledge of
the process that produces RB, allowing imputation of B. And that will nearly always require
strong modeling assumptions, assumptions which usually cannot be tested with the data at
hand.
In every DAG described above, we want to impute missing values of B. In the first and
second, we do so in order to not throw away corresponding values of M. In the third, we
have to impute to hope for any sensible estimate of B →K. So let’s see how to actually do
the imputation.
The statistical trick with Bayesian imputation is to model the variable that has missing
values. Each missing value is assigned a unique parameter. The observed values give us
information about the distribution of the values. This distribution becomes a prior for the
missing values. This prior will then be updated by full model. So there will be a posterior
