15.2. MISSING DATA
511
R code
15.7
N <- 500
A <- rnorm(N)
M <- rnorm(N,-A)
D <- rnorm(N,A)
A_obs <- rnorm(N,A)
In a problem at the end of the Chapter, I’ll ask you to investigate this further.
When you have your own data and your own particular measurement concerns, all of
this can be overwhelming. But the way to proceed is same as always: Use your background
knowledge to write down a generative model or models, simulate data from these models in
order to understand the inferential risks, and design a statistical approach that can work at
least in theory.
15.2. Missing data
With measurement error, the insight is to realize that any uncertain piece of data can be
replaced by a distribution that reflects uncertainty. But sometimes data are simply missing—
no measurement is available at all. At first, this seems like a lost cause. What can be done
when there is no measurement at all, not even one with error?
The most common treatment of missing values is just to drop all cases with any missing
values. This is known as complete case analysis. It is the default and silent behavior of
most statistical software. Another common response is to replace missing values with some
assumed value, like the mean of the variable or a reference value like zero. Neither of these
treatments is safe. Complete case analysis is at best inefficient. It throws away data. But it can
also produce bias, depending upon the causal details. Replacing missing values with static
values is never warranted—we do not know those values, and if you fix them, the model will
think it knows them with certainty.
So what can we do instead? We can think causally about missingness, and we can use
the model to impute missing values. A generative model tells you whether the process that
produced the missing values will also prevent the identification of causal effects. Sometimes
it does. Other times it does not. Luckily, we can add missingness to a DAG and use the same
criteria you already learned to figure out whether it produces confounding. A generative
model also provides information about values you have not yet seen.213 And this information
can be used to average over our uncertainty and make full use of the non-missing values,
dropping nothing.
All this will become clearer, if we draw some diagrams. We’ll start with some simple,
fictional examples. Then we’ll turn to some real examples.
Rethinking: Missing data are meaningful data. The fact that a variable has an unobserved value is
still an observation. It is data, just with a very special value. The meaning of this value depends upon
the context. Consider for example a questionnaire on personal income. If some people refuse to fill
in their income, this may be associated with low (or high) income. Therefore a model that tries to
predict the missing values can be enlightening. In ecology, the absence of an observation of a species
is a subtle kind of observation. It could mean the species isn’t there. Or it could mean it is there but
you didn’t see it. An entire category of models, occupancy models,214 exists to take this duality
into account. Missing values are always produced by some process, and thinking about that process
can sometimes solve big problems.
