16.2. HIDDEN MINDS AND OBSERVED BEHAVIOR
543
Now since multiplication becomes addition on the log scale, we can rewrite this as:
log wi = log(k) + log(π) + 2 log(p) + 3 log(hi)
On the log scale, this is a linear regression. The first three terms above comprise the intercept.
Then the term 3 log(hi) is a predictor variable with a fixed coefficient of 3. Theory gave us the
value of that coefficient. We didn’t need to estimate it. But it still has the form of an ordinary
linear regression term.
I point this out to highlight one of the reasons that generalized linear models are so
powerful. Lots of natural relationships are GLM relationships, on a speicfic scale of mea-
surement. At the same time, the GLM approach wants to simply estimate parameters which
may be informed by a proper theory, as in this case.
16.2. Hidden minds and observed behavior
One of the most basic problem in scientific inference is the so-called inverse problem:
How to figure out causes from observations. It is a problem, because many different causes
can produce the same evidence. So while it can be easy to go forward from a known cause
to predicted observations, it can very hard to go backwards from observation to cause.
Every branch of science has its own inverse problems. In this section, we’ll consider
a simple example from developmental psychology. Children may possess many different
cognitive strategies for making decisions. Given some observations of their behavior, which
strategy was the cause? Let’s consider specifically an experiment in which 629 children aged
4 to 14 saw four other children choose among three different colored boxes (Figure 16.3).
Each child then made their own choice. In each trial, three demonstrators choose the same
color. The fourth demonstrator chose a different color. So in each trial, one of the colors was
the majority choice, another was the minority choice, and the final color was unchosen. How
do we figure out from this experiment whether children are influenced by the majority?
Let’s load the data222 and take a closer look.
R code
16.4
library(rethinking)
data(Boxes)
precis(Boxes)
Figure 16.3. The apparatus used in the ex-
periment. The “choice box” has three tubes,
each with a different color. When a ball is
dropped into a tube, a toy comes out of the
box. Four children demonstrated. Then the
choice of a fifth child was recorded. How did
the choices of the first four influence the fifth
child’s choice?
