16.2. HIDDEN MINDS AND OBSERVED BEHAVIOR
545
About two-thirds of the choices are for the majority color, but only half the children are
actually following the majority. The above is only one simulation, but it demonstrates the
problem. When different hidden strategies can produce the same behavior, inference about
strategy is more complicated than just counting behavior.
We’ll consider 5 different strategies children might use.
(1) Follow the Majority: Copy the majority demonstrated color.
(2) Follow the Minority: Copy the minority demonstrated color.
(3) Maverick: Choose the color that no demonstrator chose.
(4) Random: Choose a color at random, ignoring the demonstrators.
(5) Follow First: Copy the color that was demonstrated first. This was either the ma-
jority color (when majority_first equals 1) or the minority color (when 0).
Each strategy entails a vector of three probabilities, one for each choice. For example, Ran-
dom is [1/3, 1/3, 1/3]. The complicated one is Follow First, which depends upon the order
of presentation.
An obvious question is: Why these strategies? The equally obvious answer is: Because
they seem a priori plausible. If there are some that you think are not plausible, or yet more
strategies that you feel should be added, the same generative framework can accomodate
them.
16.2.2. The statistical model. Now we need a statistical model that reflects the generative
model above. Remember, statistical models run in reverse of generative models. In the gen-
erative model, we assume strategies and simulate observed behavior. In the statistical model,
we instead assume observed behavior (the data) and simulate strategies (parameters).
In this example, we can’t directly measure each child’s strategy. It is an unobserved vari-
able. But each strategy has a specific probability of producing each choice. We can use that
fact to compute the probability of each choice, given parameters which specify the proba-
bility of each strategy. Then we let Bayes loose and get the posterior distribution of each
strategy back. Before we can let Bayes loose, we’ll need to enumerate the parameters, assign
priors to each, and also figure out some technical issues for coding. I’ll move through these
tasks slowly.
The unobserved variables are the probabilities that a child uses each of the five strategies.
This means five values, but since these must sum to one, we need only four parameters. There
is a variable type called a simplex that handles this for us. A simplex is a vector of values
that must sum to some constant, usually one. Stan allows us to declare a vector of parameters
as a simplex, and then Stan handles the bookkeeping of the constant sum for us. We can
give this simplex a Dirichlet prior, which is a prior for probability distributions. We used
both Dirichlet and a simplex already back in Chapter 12 to construct ordered categorical
predictors (page 405). We’ll use a weak uniform prior on the simplex of strategy probabilities,
which we’ll label p:
p ∼Dirichlet([4, 4, 4, 4, 4])
As you saw back in Chapter 12, this prior doesn’t mean that we expect the strategies to be
equally probable. Instead it means that we expect that any one of them could be more or less
probable than any other. If you make those 4s larger, the prior starts to say that we expect
them to be actually equal.
Now how to express the probability of the data, the likelihood? For each observed choice
yi, each strategy s implies a probability of seeing yi. Call this Pr(yi|s), the probability of the
