14.7. PRACTICE
499
of parameters. The LKJcorr prior was introduced as a convenient family of priors for corre-
lation matrices. You saw how covariance models can be applied to causal inference, using
instrumental variables and the front-door criterion. Gaussian processes represent a practi-
cal method of extending the varying effects strategy to continuous dimensions of similarity,
such as spatial, network, phylogenetic, or any other abstract distance between entities in the
data. The next chapter continues to develop the broader multilevel approach by applying it
to commonplace problems in statistical inference: measurement error and missing data.
14.7. Practice
Easy.
14E1. Add to the following model varying slopes on the predictor x.
yi ∼Normal(µi, σ)
µi = αgroup[i] + βxi
αgroup ∼Normal(α, σα)
α ∼Normal(0, 10)
β ∼Normal(0, 1)
σ ∼HalfCauchy(0, 2)
σα ∼HalfCauchy(0, 2)
14E2. Think up a context in which varying intercepts will be positively correlated with varying
slopes. Provide a mechanistic explanation for the correlation.
14E3. When is it possible for a varying slopes model to have fewer effective parameters (as estimated
by WAIC or DIC) than the corresponding model with fixed (unpooled) slopes? Explain.
Medium.
14M1. Repeat the café robot simulation from the beginning of the chapter. This time, set rho to zero,
so that there is no correlation between intercepts and slopes. How does the posterior distribution of
the correlation reflect this change in the underlying simulation?
14M2. Fit this multilevel model to the simulated café data:
Wi ∼Normal(µi, σ)
µi = αcafé[i] + βcafé[i]Ai
αcafé ∼Normal(α, σα)
βcafé ∼Normal(β, σβ)
α ∼Normal(0, 10)
β ∼Normal(0, 10)
σ ∼HalfCauchy(0, 1)
σα ∼HalfCauchy(0, 1)
σβ ∼HalfCauchy(0, 1)
Use WAIC to compare this model to the model from the chapter, the one that uses a multi-variate
Gaussian prior. Explain the result.
14M3. Re-estimate the varying slopes model for the UCBadmit data, now using a non-centered pa-
rameterization. Compare the efficiency of the forms of the model, using n_eff. Which is better?
Which chain sampled faster?
