496
14. ADVENTURES IN COVARIANCE
sigma_sq
0.16 0.02
0.13
0.19
2251
1
This model annihilates group size—the posterior mean is almost zero and there is a lot of
mass on both sides of zero. The big change from the previous model suggests that there is a
lot of clustering of brain size in the tree and that this produces a spurious relationship with
group size, which also clusters in the tree. How the model uses this clustering depends upon
the details of the correlation matrix we gave it.
The Brownian motion model is a special kind of Gaussian process in which the covari-
ance declines in a very rigid way with increasing distance. There is no need to be so rigid and
good reason to think evolution is not well-described by Brownian motion. It’s very common
to use something called Pagel’s lambda to modify the Brownian motion model. But all
this does is scale all of the species correlations by a common factor. It maintains the same
arbitrary and unrealistic distance model. Another common alternative is the Ornstein–
Uhlenbeck process (or OU process), which is a damped Brownian motion process that
tends to return towards some mean (or means). What this does in practice is constrain
the variation, making the relationship between phylogenetic distance and covariance non-
linear.208 More precisely, the OU process just defines the covariance between two species i
and j as:
K(i, j) = η2 exp(−ρ2Dij)
This is an exponential distance kernel, unlike the quadratic kernel in the previous example.
The exponential kernel says that covariance between points (species) declines rapidly, mak-
ing for much less smooth functions. It is also usually harder to fit to data, since it a much
rougher function. This means in practice that you’ll need to be careful about priors, poten-
tially making them narrower.
But the OU process is still a Gaussian process, and you can fit it the same way as the
quadratic kernel in the previous section. The literature on phylogenetic regression has not
emphasized this fact. But expressing the model as a Gaussian process makes it possible to
customize the function space as the problem requires.209 This framing isn’t yet common.
Biologists tend to use phylogenies under a cloud of superstition and fearful button pushing.
But the Gaussian process framing both unifies existing approaches and allows the model to
describe the pattern of covariation with phylogenetic distance. Hopefully it also makes clear
that there is no correct way to include phylogenetic distance. If the goal is estimate a causal
effect, then it isn’t good enough to reject some null model. We need to usefully reconstruct
patterns among unmeasured confounds. And different evolutionary histories will require
different models.
To build the Gaussian process regression, we need a distance matrix. We already have
that—you computed it earlier. Then we just need the Gaussian process construction line of
code. In this example, we’ll use the OU process kernel, which is known more generally as the
L1 norm, which ulam provides as cov_GPL1. But see the Overthinking box further down,
to see how to write your own Gaussian process kernels.
R code
14.52
# add scaled and reordered distance matrix
dat_list$Dmat <- Dmat[ spp_obs , spp_obs ] / max(Dmat)
m14.11 <- ulam(
alist(
B ~ multi_normal( mu , SIGMA ),
