512
15. MISSING DATA AND OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
(a)
H*
D
H
S
(b)
H*
D
H
S
(c)
H*
D
H
S
X
(d)
H*
D
H
S
Figure 15.4. Four causal scenarios
for the missing homework. See text
for a complete explanation. (a) Dogs
(D) eat homework (H) completely at
random. (b) Dogs eat homework of
students who study (S) too much. (c)
Dogs eatmorehomework in noisy(X)
homes, where the homework is also
worse.
(d) Dogs prefer to eat bad
homework.
15.2.1. DAG ate my homework. Consider a sample of students, all of whom own dogs.
The students produce homework (H). This homework varies in quality, influenced by how
much each student studies (S). We could simulate 100 students, their attributes, and their
homework like this:
R code
15.8
N <- 100
S <- rnorm( N )
H <- rbinom( N , size=10 , inv_logit(S) )
I’ve assumed here that homework H will be graded on a 10-point scale. More studying pro-
duces more points, on average.
And then some dogs eat some homework. One way to get a grasp on the problem of
missing data is to think of missingness as its own variable, a 0/1 indicator for missingness.
So let D be a 0/1 indicator variable for whether each dog ate homework. Once homework has
been eaten, we cannot observe the true distribution of homework. But we do get to observe
H∗, a copy of H with missing values where D = 1. In DAG form, this implies H →H∗←D.
We’d like to learn the causal influence of studying (S) on homework (H), S →H. But
since we don’t observe H, we have to use H∗instead. So we are relying on S →H∗being a
good approximation of S →H. When will this be true? The impact of any missing values in
H∗depends upon how the missing values are generated. It depends upon their cause. Let’s
consider four scenarios, depicted as DAGs in Figure 15.4.
The simplest scenario, (a) in the upper left, is when dogs are completely random. A
dog’s decision to eat a piece of homework or not is not influenced by any relevant variable.
Therefore there is no arrow entering D in the DAG. Let’s simulate some random eating:
R code
15.9
D <- rbern( N ) # dogs completely random
Hm <- H
Hm[D==1] <- NA
That Hm variable is H∗. We can’t use * in a variable name. Look inside Hm and you’ll see
random NAs scattered about. Is this a problem? We can decide by considering whether the
outcome H is independent of D. More generally, a minimal condition for missing values to
