504
15. MISSING DATA AND OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
4
6
8
10
12
14
Median age marriage
Divorce rate
0
1
2
3
4
6
8
10
12
14
log population
Divorce rate
Figure 15.1. Left: Divorce rate by median age of marriage, States of the
United States. Vertical bars show plus and minus one standard deviation
of the Gaussian uncertainty in measured divorce rate. Right: Divorce rate,
again with standard deviations, against log population of each State. Smaller
States produce more uncertain estimates.
step would be to generate the true values of the variables. Then we simulate the observation
process itself, where the measurement error arises. It is just part of the statistical model and
likewise part of the causal model.
Recall the causal model of the divorce example from Chapter 5. Let’s take that same
model and now add observation error on the outcome:
A
D
Dobs
M
eD
There’s a lotgoing on here. But we can proceed one step ata time. The left triangle of this DAG
is the same system that we worked with back in Chapter 5. Age at marriage (A) influences
divorce (D) both directly and indirectly, passing through marriage rate (M). Then we have
the observation model. The true divorce rate D cannot be observed, so it is circled as an
unobserved node. However we do get to observe Dobs, which is a function of both the true
rate D and some unobserved error eD.
What are we supposed to do now? Note that Dobs is a descendent of D. Using it in place of
D doesn’t necessarily introduce confounding. Probably the majority of regressions are really
using proxies like Dobs, because most variables are measurements with some error. But even
though it doesn’t necessarily open a non-causal path, using a proxy can introduce systematic
bias, distorting the estimates. Since the extent of measurement error varies across States in
a way that is associated with variables of interest, that is likely in this example.
We could do better by using D instead of Dobs. But we don’t have D. However we can
try to reconstruct it, respecting the uncertainty to avoid false confidence. In these data, the
