15 Missing Data and Other Opportunities
A big advantage of Bayesian inference is that it obviates the need to be clever. For ex-
ample, there’s a classic probability puzzle known as Bertrand’s box paradox.210 The version
that I prefer involves pancakes. Suppose I cook three pancakes. The first pancake is burnt
on both sides (BB). The second pancake is burnt on only one side (BU). The third pancake
is not burnt at all (UU). Now I serve you—at random—one of these pancakes, and the side
facing up on your plate is burnt. What is the probability that the other side is also burnt?
This is a hard problem, if we rely upon intuition. Most people say “one-half,” but that
is quite wrong. And with no false modesty, my intuition is no better. But I have learned to
solve these problems by cold hard ruthless application of conditional probability. There’s no
need to be clever when you can be ruthless.
So let’s get ruthless. Applying conditional probability means using what we do know to
refine our knowledge about what we wish to know. In other words:
Pr(want to know|already know)
In this case, we know the up side is burnt. We want to know whether or not the down side
is burnt. The definition of conditional probability tells us:
Pr(burnt down|burnt up) = Pr(burnt up, burnt down)
Pr(burnt up)
This is just the definition of conditional probability, labeled with our pancake problem.
We want to know if the down side is burnt, and the information we have is that the up
side is burnt. We condition on the information, so we update our state of information in
light of it. The definition tells us that the probability we want is just the probability of the
burnt/burnt pancake divided by the probability of seeing a burnt side up. The probability
of the burnt/burnt pancake is 1/3, because a pancake was selected at random. The probabil-
ity the up side is burnt must average over each way we can get dealt a burnt top side of the
pancake. This is:
Pr(burnt up) = Pr(BB)(1) + Pr(BU)(0.5) + Pr(UU)(0) = (1/3) + (1/3)(1/2) = 0.5
So all together:
Pr(burnt down|burnt up) = 1/3
1/2 = 2
3
If you don’t quite believe this answer, you can do a quick simulation to confirm it.
501
