15.1. MEASUREMENT ERROR
505
reported standard errors Divorce.SE were calculated with knowledge of the process that
produces the errors eD. How can use this informaton in a statistical model? It’s just like a
simulation, but in reverse. If you wanted to simulate measurement error, you would assign a
distribution to each observation and sample from it. For example, suppose the true value of
a measurement is 10 meters. If it is measured with Gaussian error with standard deviation
of 2 meters, this implies a probability distribution for any realized measurement y:
y ∼Normal(10, 2)
As the measurement error here shrinks, all the probability piles up on 10. But when there is
error, many measurements are more and less plausible. This is what I mean by saying that
ordinary data are a special case of a distribution. And here is the key insight: If we don’t know
the true value (10 in this example), then we can just put a parameter there and let Bayes do
the rest.
Here’s how to define the error distribution for each divorce rate. For each observed value
Dobs,i, there will be one parameter, Dtrue,i, defined by:
Dobs,i ∼Normal(Dtrue,i, Dse,i)
All this does is define the measurement Dobs,i as having the specified Gaussian distribution
centered on the unknown parameter Dtrue,i. So the above defines a probability for each
State i’s observed divorce rate, given a known measurement error. If you simulated observed
divorce rates from known true rates, it would look like:
D_obs <- rnorm( N_states , D_true , D_se )
A simulation like this goes from assumptions about the distribution to data. When we in-
stead estimate D_true, we run it in reverse, using Bayesian updating to go from data to
distribution. This is what we’ve been doing since the beginning.
This is a lot to take in. But we’ll go one step at a time. Recall that the goal is to model
divorce rate D as a linear function of age at marriage A and marriage rate M. Here’s what the
model looks like, with the measurement errors highlighted in blue:
Dobs,i ∼Normal(Dtrue,i, Dse,i)
[distribution for observed values]
Dtrue,i ∼Normal(µi, σ)
[distribution for true values]
µi = α + βAAi + βMMi
[linear model to assess A →D]
α ∼Normal(0, 0.2)
βA ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
βM ∼Normal(0, 0.5)
σ ∼Exponential(1)
This is like a linear regression, but with the addition of the top line that connects the obser-
vation to the true value. Each Dtrue parameter also gets a second role as the mean of another
distribution, one that predicts the observed measurement. A cool implication that will arise
here is that information flows in both directions—the uncertainty in measurement influences
the regression parameters in the linear model, and the regression parameters in the linear
model also influence the uncertainty in the measurements. There will be shrinkage.
Here is the ulam version of the model, with all the variables standardized:
R code
15.3
dlist <- list(
D_obs = standardize( d$Divorce ),
