570
ENDNOTES
11. Lansing and Cox (2011). See objections by Hahn, Bentley, and Feldman in the peer commentary to the arti-
cle. [7]
12. See Cho (2011) for a December 2011 summary focusing on debates about measurement. [9]
13. For an autopsy of the experiment, see (posted 2012) http://profmattstrassler.com/articles-and-posts/particle-
physics-basics/ neutrinos/neutrinos-faster-than-light/opera-what-went-wrong/. [9]
14. See Mulkay and Gilbert (1981) for many examples of “Popperism” from practicing scientists, including fa-
mous ones. [9]
15. For an accessible history of some measurement issues in the development of physics and biology, including
early experiments on relativity and abiogenesis, I recommend Collins and Pinch (1998). Some scientists have
read this book as an attack on science. However, as the authors clarify in the second edition, this was not their in-
tention. Science makes myths, like all cultures do. That doesn’t necessarily imply that science does not work. See
also Daston and Galison (2007), which tours concepts of objective measurement, spanning several centuries. [9]
16. The first chapter of Sober (2008) contains a similar discussion of modus tollens. Note that the statistical phi-
losophy of Sober’s book is quite different from that of the book you are holding. In particular, Sober is weakly
anti-Bayesian. This is important, because it emphasizes that rejecting modus tollens as a model of statistical in-
ference has nothing to do with any debates about Bayesian versus non-Bayesian tools. [9]
17. Popper himself had to deal with this kind of theory, because the rise of quantum mechanics in his lifetime
presented rather serious challenges to the notion that measurement was unproblematic. See Chapter 9 in his
Logic of Scientific Discovery, for example. [10]
18. See the Afterword to the 2nd edition of Collins and Pinch (1998) for examples of textbooks getting it wrong
by presenting tidy fables about the definitiveness of evidence. [10]
19. A great deal has been written about the sociology of science and the interface of science and public interest.
Interested novices might begin with Kitcher (2011), Science in a Democratic Society, which has a very broad top-
ical scope and so can serve as an introduction to many dilemmas. [10]
20. Yes, even procedures that claim to be free of assumptions do have assumptions and are a kind of model. All
systems of formal representation, including numbers, do not directly reference reality. For example, there is
more than one way to construct “real” numbers in mathematics, and there are important consequences in some
applications. In application, all formal systems are like models. See http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/philosophy-
mathematics/ for a short overview of some different stances that can be sustained towards reasoning in mathe-
matical systems. [10]
21. Most scholars trace frequentism to British logician John Venn (1834–1923), as for example presented in his
1876 book. Speaking of the proportion of male births in all births, Venn said, “probability is nothing but that
proportion” (page 84). Venn taught Fisher some of his maths, so this may be where Fisher acquired his opposi-
tion to Bayesian probability. Regardless, it seems to be a peculiar English invention. [11]
22. Fisher (1956). See also Fisher (1955), the first major section of which discusses the same point. Some peo-
ple would dispute that Fisher was a “frequentist,” because he championed his own likelihood methods over the
methods of Neyman and Pearson. But Fisher definitely rejected the broader Bayesian approach to probability
theory. See Endnote 27. [11]
23. This last sentence is a rephrasing from Lindley (1971): “A statistician faced with some data often embeds it in
a family of possible data that is just as much a product of his fantasy as is a prior distribution.” Dennis V. Lindley
(1923–2013) was a prominent defender of Bayesian data analysis when it had very few defenders. [11]
24. It’s hard to find an accessible introduction to image analysis, because it’s a very computational subject. At
the intermediate level, see Marin and Robert (2007), Chapter 8. You can hum over their mathematics and still
acquaint yourself with the different goals and procedures. See also Jaynes (1984) for spirited comments on the
history of Bayesian image analysis and his pessimistic assessment of non-Bayesian approaches. There are better
non-Bayesian approaches since. [11]
