16.4. POPULATION DYNAMICS
555
Now not only does the most recent population size Ht−1 predict the present, but so too does
the population size two time periods ago Ht−2. Everything from prices to temperature to
wars has been modeled this way.
There are several famous problems with autoregressive models, despite how often they
are used. They are surely generalized linear madness. First, nothing that happened two time
periods ago causes the present, except through its influence on the state of the system one
time period ago. So no lag beyond one period makes any causal sense. It’s pure predictive
epicycle. Of course some causal influences act slower than others. But that means you need
another variable, not that the distance past can influence the present. Second, if the state of
the system, Ht and Lt here, are measured with error, then the model is propagating error.
It isn’t the observed Ht−1 that influences Ht, but rather the real unobserved Ht−1. In other
words, what we really need is a state space model. Third, in most cases there is no bio-
logical, economic, or physical interpretation of the parameters. Consider for example the α
intercept in the equations above. It implies that even when there are no hares, Ht−1 = 0,
there can be α hares in the next period. Sometimes all this nonsense is okay, if you care
about is forecasting. But often these models don’t even make good forecasts, because getting
the future right often depends upon have a decent causal model.
It’s easy to do better, if you use a little science. In this section, we’ll model the hares and
lynx using an incredibly basic ecological model. In the process, you’ll see how to fit systems
of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) to data.
16.4.1. The scientific model. The hare population reproduces at a rate that depends upon
the plants. And it shrinks at a rate that depends upon predators. Let Ht be the number of
hares at time t. Then we can assert that the rate of change in the hare population is:
dH
dt = Ht(birth rate) −Ht(death rate)
Everything is multiplied by Ht, because if there are no hares, then there are no births or
deaths. Reproduction and death are per capita processes. The simplest ecological model
makes birth and death rates constant. Let’s call the birth rate bH and the mortality rate mH.
This implies:
dH
dt = HtbH −HtmH = Ht(bH −mH)
The per capita growth rate is the difference between the birth rate and the death rate. I think
of this as the first law of ecology. Every model must include it in some form.
The form we want to use here modifies the mortality rate so it also depends upon the
presence of a predator, the clever lynx. Let Lt be the number of lynx at time t. Then we can
write:
dH
dt = Ht(bH −LtmH)
Similar logic gives us a similar equation for the rate of change in the lynx population:
dL
dt = Lt(HtbL −mL)
In this case, it is birth that depends upon the other species and mortality that is a constant.
Now we have a model in which the population dynamics of the two species are deter-
mined by two coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs). This isn’t a realistic model.
The plants that hares eat are not constantly available, and lynx eat more than just hares. But
