15.2. MISSING DATA
515
a
1.80 0.04 1.74
1.85
1051
1
bS 0.83 0.03 0.78
0.88
1060
1
The estimate for bS is still biased, but not as badly. This is only one example, but you can run
thousands of simulations like this one (I show you how in the Overthinking box at the end
of the section), and you’ll get this pattern on average. How has dropping students helped our
estimate? The homework that is missing is from noisy houses. And it is noisy houses that
mess up our estimate of bS, through omitted variable bias. So when we delete those houses
from the data, the estimate actually gets better.
Note that this improvement is not a general property of missing data in such a DAG. For
example, if you change the missingness rule instead to:
R code
15.14
D <- ifelse( abs(X) < 1 , 1 , 0 )
now missingness actually makes the estimate worse. Give it a try. What happens under
missingness depends upon the details of the functions in the full structural causal model.
The DAG isn’t enough to say what will happen. But the DAG is enough to say that we should
be wary.
Just one more set of dogs remain. In Figure 15.4 (d), there is no X, but there is a path
from H →D. Now dogs prefer to eat bad homework. This is possibly because their owners
feed it to them, but maybe it somehow tastes better too. To simulate from this DAG:
R code
15.15
N <- 100
S <- rnorm(N)
H <- rbinom( N , size=10 , inv_logit(S) )
D <- ifelse( H < 5 , 1 , 0 )
Hm <- H
Hm[D==1] <- NA
Go ahead and try to estimate the causal effect S →H. You won’t be able to do a good job.
And there is nothing to do here, because there is nothing we can condition on to block the
non-causal path S →H →D →H∗. This type of missingness, in which the variable causes
its own missing values, is the worst. Unless you know the mechanism that produces the
missingness (D in this case), there is little hope. And if you do you know the mechanism,
even then it might be hopeless. Sometimes measurement is all we have. We have to do it
better.
The point of these examples is not to give you nightmares. The point is to illustrate
that the consequences of missing data are diverse. But the diversity is explicable causally,
in terms of which variables cause missing values in which other variables. And the point of
emphasizing simulation in these examples is to empower you to explore your own scenarios,
the ones relevant to your own research. Even when we cannot completely eliminate the
impact of missing data, we might be able to show, through simulation, that the expected
impact is rather small.
Rethinking: Naming completely at random. Statistical terminology can be very confusing. The
field uses ordinary words in highly technical ways. The everyday meanings of words like likelihood,
significant, and confidence barely resemble their statistical definitions. The topic of missing data is
no better. The dog-homework scenarios (Figure 15.4) sometimes go by the unhelpful names (a)
