16.4. POPULATION DYNAMICS
557
0
10
20
30
40
number (thousands)
time
Figure 16.7. Simulated population dynamics
from the lynx-hare model. Black: Hare pop-
ulation. Blue: Lynx population. This model
produces repeating cycles of predators and
prey.
plot( z[,2] , type="l" , ylim=c(0,max(z[,2])) , lwd=2 , xaxt="n" ,
ylab="number (thousands)" , xlab="" )
lines( z[,1] , col=rangi2 , lwd=2 )
mtext( "time" , 1 )
The result is displayed in Figure 16.7. The black curve is the hare population, and the blue
is the lynx population. This model produces cycles, similar to what we see in the data. The
model behaves this way, because lynx eat hares. Once the hares are eaten, the lynx begin to
die off. Then the cycle repeats.
16.4.2. The statistical model. To turn the lynx-hare model into a statistical analysis, we
need to connect the deterministic population dynamics to the observed data. Observed data
have many reasons not to exactly match a deterministic expectation. The most obvious is
that we never get to count every hare and lynx. We just have partial samples. So we need to
model both the underlying population dynamics and the observation process.
Let Ht and Lt as before represent the numbers of hares and lynx at time t. And now
let ht and ℓt represent the observed numbers of hares and lynx. While Ht causes Ht+dt, the
observed ht does not cause anything. It’s just a pale reflection of the unobserved state of the
system at time t. We have to use a statistical model to project it back to the underly model of
Ht and Lt. Then we can make a prediction for ht+dt and ℓt+dt.
To do this, we need to assign an error distribution to the observation process. To do this
in a principled way, we should outline the generative process that goes from the true state of
nature, Ht, to the measurement, ht. First, hares get trapped. Suppose each hare is trapped
with some probability pt which varies year to year, for all sorts of reasons. Third, the actual
number of pelts were rounded to the nearest 100 and divided by 1000. So they are no longer
counts exactly. This all sounds like a mess. That’s measurement for you.
We can do this though. Suppose for example there is a population of Ht = 104 hares.
Suppose also that the annual trapping rate varies according to a beta distribution pt ∼
Beta(2, 18). This means the average is 10%, but it is very rarely double that. We get a bi-
nomial count of pelts sampled for the population of hares, and then that is rounded to the
nearest 100 and divided by 1000. Let’s see what this sort of distribution looks like:
