528
15. MISSING DATA AND OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
After Captain Cook, Hawaii is correctly coded with 1 for belief in moralizing gods. It is also
a fact that Hawaii never developed its own writing system. So there is no direct evidence of
when moralizing gods appeared in Hawaii. Any imputation model needs to decide how to
fill in those NA values. With so much missing data, any imputation model would necessarily
make very strong assumptions.
The strongest assumption would be to just replace all the of the NA values with some con-
stant, like zero. This implies a generative model in which any polity that believes in moraliz-
ing gods will never produce a missing value. In the case of Hawaii, it assumes that moralizing
gods appear only after Captain Cook arrives. This procedure results in biased estimates of
time of adoption of moralizing gods, because presumably more than just Hawaii believed in
moralizing gods before they started writing about them. You might think no analyst would
impute missing values this way. But this sort of arbitrary imputation is not rare.218
What else could we do? In principle we could perform a model-based imputation of
the missing values in moralizing_gods. But we don’t have any obviously correct way to
do this. We can’t just associate presence/absence of moralizing gods with population size,
because that’s the very question under investigation. Assuming the answer seems like a bad
idea. Sometimes all that statistics can do for us is confirm that we’ll just have to gather more
evidence. Here that means doing research to replace NA values with observations.
But if we were going to try to impute the missing values, there is another obstacle. The
moralizing_gods variable is discrete. It can take the values of zero or one only. Whether
imputing or dealing with measurement error, discrete variables are computationally trickier
than continuous variables. The next section shows you how to handle them.
Rethinking: Present details about missing data. The moralizing gods example contains a lot of
missing data—60% of the primary exposure variable is NA. Obviously in cases like this one, it is very
important to inform readers about missing data and carefully justify how they were handled. But
even in more routine contexts, with more modest amounts of missing data, clear documentation
of missing data and its treatment is necessary. This is best done with a causal model that makes
transparent what is being assumed about the source of missing values and simultaneously justifies
how they are handled. But the minimum is to report the counts of missing values in each variable
and what was done with them.
15.3. Categorical errors and discrete absences
The examples above focused on nice continuous variables. In the section on measure-
ment error, the variables were continuous. In the section on missing data, neocortex percent
is continuous. When a variable is continuous, you can just assign a parameter to each un-
known value—whether it is measured with error or rather completely missing—and let the
Markov chain do the hard part.
But when a variable is instead discrete—0/1 or 1,2,3,4 for example—then the Markov
chain needs some extra tutoring. Discrete unobserved variables require discrete parameters.
There are two issues with discrete parameters. First, a discrete variable will not produce
a smooth surface for Hamiltonian Monte Carlo to glide around on. HMC just doesn’t do
discrete variables. Second, other estimation approaches also have problems with discrete
parameter spaces, because discrete jumps are difficult to calibrate. Chains tend to get stuck
for long periods.
But that doesn’t mean we are stuck. In almost every case, we don’t need to sample
discrete parameters at all. Instead we can use a special technique, known to experts as a
