562
16. GENERALIZED LINEAR MADNESS
axis( 1 , at=at , labels=Lynx_Hare$Year[at] )
for ( s in 1:21 ) {
lines( 1:21 , post$pop[s,,2] , col=col.alpha("black",0.2) , lwd=2 )
lines( 1:21 , post$pop[s,,1] , col=col.alpha(rangi2,0.4) , lwd=2 )
}
The result is the bottom plot in Figure 16.9. Compared to the pelt time series, these popu-
lation dynamics are smooth. There is a lot of uncertainty about population size, of course.
But each trajectory connects smoothly, because there is no measurement error at this level.
The differential equation model is deterministic, so it shows no stochasticity.
16.4.3. Lynx lessons. There are good reasons to doubt that this model is a perfect expla-
nation of the population dynamics of hares and lynx. While lynx really do depend almost
exclusively on hares at times, hares are eaten by lots of predators. So the hare cycles are
probably not caused by the lynx. In other words, there is a confound lurking here. Real
ecologies are complicated. In the practice problems at the end, I’ll ask you to use this model
on an experimental predator-prey system that lacks all those complexities. I’ll also ask you
to compare an autoregressive model and see how many epicycles you need to approach the
forecasting quality of the simple predator-prey model.
16.5. Summary
This chapter demonstrated four analyses in which a statistical model is motived directly
by a scientific model. This approach stands in contrast to the customary approach of going
directly from a vague scientific model, whether a DAG or just a bowl of variables, to a general-
ized linear model. The goal was to illustrate both the advantages and challenges of translating
scientifically informed structural causal models into statistical machines. The goal was not
to persuade you to never use a generalized linear model. But hopefully it inspires you to see
the use of a GLM as a decision in itself, not an obligation.
16.6. Practice
Easy.
16E1. x
Medium.
16M1. Modify the cylinder height model, m16.1, so that the exponent 3 on height is instead a free
parameter. Do you recover the value of 3 or not? Plot the posterior predictions for the new model.
How do they differ from those of m16.1?
16M2. Conduct a prior predictive simulation for the cylinder height model. Begin with the priors
in the chapter. Do these produce reasonable prior height distributions? If not, which modifications
do you suggest?
16M3. Use prior predictive simulations to investigate the Lynx-hare model. Begin with the priors
in the chapter. Which population dynamics do these produce? Can you suggest any improvements
to the priors, on the basis of your simulations?
Hard.
