ENDNOTES
573
60. Rice (2010) presents an interesting construction of classical Fisherian testing through the adoption of loss
functions. [61]
61. See Hauer (2004) for three tales from transportation safety in which testing resulted in premature incorrect
decisions and a demonstrable and continuing loss of human life. [61]
62. It is poorly appreciated that coin tosses are very hard to bias, as long as you catch them in the air. Once they
land and bounce and spin, however, it is very easy to bias them. [67]
63. E. T. Jaynes (1922–1998) said all of this much more succinctly: Jaynes (1985), page 351, “It would be very
nice to have a formal apparatus that gives us some ‘optimal’ way of recognizing unusual phenomena and
inventing new classes of hypotheses that are most likely to contain the true one; but this remains an art for the
creative human mind.” See also Box (1980) for a similar perspective. [68]
Chapter 4
64. Leo Breiman, at the start of Chapter 9 of his classic book on probability theory (Breiman, 1968), says “there
is really no completely satisfying answer” to the question “why normal?” Many mathematical results remain
mysterious, even after we prove them. So if you don’t quite get why the normal distribution is the limiting dis-
tribution, you are in good company. [75]
65. For the reader hungry for mathematical details, see Frank (2009) for a nicely illustrated explanation of this,
using Fourier transforms. [76]
66. Technically, the distribution of sums converges to normal only when the original distribution has finite vari-
ance. What this means practically is that the magnitude of any newly sampled value cannot be so big as to
overwhelm all of the previous values. There are natural phenomena with effectively infinite variance, but we
won’t be working with any. Or rather, when we do, I won’t comment on it. [76]
67. The most famous non-technical book about this topic is Taleb (2007). This book has had a large impact.
There is also a quite large technical literature on the topic. Note that the terms heavy tail and fat tail sometimes
have precise technical definitions. [78]
68. A very nice essay by Pasquale Cirillo and Nassim Nicholas Taleb, “The Decline of Violent Conflicts: What
Do The Data Really Say?,” focuses on this issue. [78]
69. Howell (2010) and Howell (2000). See also Lee and DeVore (1976). Much more raw data is available for
download from https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/handle/1807/10395. [81]
70. Jaynes (2003), page 21–22. See that book’s index for other mentions in various statistical arguments. [84]
71. See Jaynes (1986) for an entertaining example concerning the beer preferences of left-handed kangaroos.
There is an updated 1996 version of this paper available online. [84]
72. The strategy is the same grid approximation strategy as before (page 40). But now there are two dimensions,
and so there is a geometric (literally) increase in bother. The algorithm is mercifully short, however, if not trans-
parent. Think of the code as being six distinct commands. The first two lines of code just establish the range of
µ and σ values, respectively, to calculate over, as well as how many points to calculate in-between. The third line
of code expands those chosen µ and σ values into a matrix of all of the combinations of µ and σ. This matrix
is stored in a data frame, post. In the monstrous fourth line of code, shown in expanded form to make it easier
to read, the log-likelihood at each combination of µ and σ is computed. This line looks so awful, because we
have to be careful here to do everything on the log scale. Otherwise rounding error will quickly make all of the
posterior probabilities zero. So what sapply does is pass the unique combination of µ and σ on each row of
post to a function that computes the log-likelihood of each observed height, and adds all of these log-likelihoods
together (sum). In the fifth line, we multiply the prior by the likelihood to get the product that is proportional
to the posterior density. The priors are also on the log scale, and so we add them to the log-likelihood, which is
equivalent to multiplying the raw densities by the likelihood. Finally, the obstacle for getting back on the proba-
bility scale is that rounding error is always a threat when moving from log-probability to probability. If you use
the obvious approach, like exp( post$prod ), you’ll get a vector full of zeros, which isn’t very helpful. This
is a result of R’s rounding very small probabilities to zero. Remember, in large samples, all unique samples are
unlikely. This is why you have to work with log-probability. The code in the box dodges this problem by scaling
