15.3. CATEGORICAL ERRORS AND DISCRETE ABSENCES
529
“weighted average,” to remove discrete parameters from the model. After sampling the other
parameters, we can then use their samples to compute the posterior distribution of any dis-
crete parameter that we removed. So no information is given up. And removing the discrete
parameters actually makes the Markov chain more efficient, whatever engine you are using,
so it is usually worth doing, even if you aren’t using HMC. The technique can even be useful
when the parameters aren’t discrete, because removing continuous parameters also speeds
up the chain.
This all sounds too good to be true. It is all true. But implementing it is not at all obvious.
In this section, I’ll teach you how to do it, using the simplest example possible. The key idea,
whatever the context, is that whether a variable is observed (data) or not (parameter), the
generative model defines its information. There is a little bit of mathematics in this section,
but no more than you learned in secondary school. Once you grasp the general approach,
you can apply it to discrete variables that are not binary, including count and categorical
variables.
15.3.1. Discrete cats. Imagine a neighborhood in which every house contains a songbird.
Suppose we survey the neighborhood and sample one minute of song from each house,
recording the number of notes. You notice that some houses also have house cats, and won-
der if the presence of a cat changes the amount that each bird sings. So you try to also figure
out which houses have cats. You can do this easily in some cases, either by seeing the cat or
by asking a human resident. But in about 20% of houses, you can’t determine whether or not
a cat lives there.
This very silly example sets us a very practical working example of how to cope with
discrete missing data. We will translate this story into a generative model, simulate data
from it, and then build a statistical model that copes with the missing values. Let’s consider
the story above first as a DAG:
C*
C
N
RC
The presence/absence of a cat C influences the number of sung notes N. Because of missing
values RC however, we only observe C∗. To make this into a fully generative model, we must
now pick functions for each arrow above. Here are my choices, in statistical notation:
Ni ∼Poisson(λi)
[Probability of notes sung]
log λi = α + βCi
[Rate of notes as function of cat]
Ci ∼Bernoulli(k)
[Probability cat is present]
RC,i ∼Bernoulli(r)
[Probability of not knowing Ci]
And then to actually simulate some demonstration data, we’ll have to pick values for α, β, k,
and r. Here’s a working simulation.
R code
15.29
set.seed(9)
N_houses <- 100L
alpha <- 5
beta <- (-3)
k <- 0.5
r <- 0.2
