558
16. GENERALIZED LINEAR MADNESS
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
thousand of pelts
Density
Figure 16.8. Simulated distribution for the
observation model in which trapping proba-
bility varies from year to year. In this case, a
wide range of pelt counts are consistent with
the same true population size. This makes in-
ference about population size difficult.
R code
16.16
N <- 1e4
Ht <- 1e4
p <- rbeta(N,2,18)
h <- rbinom( N , size=Ht , prob=p )
h <- round( h/1000 , 2 )
dens( h , xlab="thousand of pelts" , lwd=2 )
I show this density in Figure 16.8. The variation in pt leads to a skewed error distribution.
Try changing Ht and the distribution of p in the code above and see how the distribution
changes.
There are several reasonable ways to approximate this distribution. We could for example
just use a Log-Normal distribution. It has the right constraints and skew. For example, we
could assign:
ht ∼Log-Normal(log(pHt), σH)
This gives ht a median of pHt, the expected proportion of the hare population that is trapped.
The parameter σH controls the dispersion. An important fact about this measurement pro-
cess is that there is no good way to estimate p, not without lots of data at least. So we’re going
to just fix it with a strong prior. If this makes you uncomfortable, notice that the model has
forced us to realize that we cannot do any better than relative population estimates, unless
we have a good way to know p. A typical time series model would just happily spin on its
epicycles, teaching us nothing this useful.
We will ignore rounding error, since it is at most 50/4000 = 0.0125 = 1.25% of the pelt
count. But if you are curious how to incorporate rounding into a statistical model, see the
Overthinking box later on. It isn’t hard to do—we just think generatively and that provides
the solution.
Let’s lay out the full statistical model now. First we have the probabilities of the observed
variables, the pelts:
ht ∼Log-Normal(log(pHHt), σH)
[Prob observed hare pelts]
ℓt ∼Log-Normal(log(pLLt), σL)
[Prob observed lynx pelts]
