17 Horoscopes
Statistics courses and books—this one included—tend to resemble horoscopes. There
are two senses to this resemblance.
First, in order to remain plausibly correct, they must remain tremendously vague. This
is because the targets of the advice, for both horoscopes and statistical advice, are diverse.
But only the most general advice applies to all cases. A horoscope uses only the basic facts of
birth to forecast life events, and a textbook statistical guide uses only the basic facts of meas-
urement and design to dictate a model. It is easy to do better, once more detail is available.
In the case of statistical analysis, it is typically only the scientist who can provide that detail,
not the statistician.230
Second, there are strong incentives for both astrologers and statisticians to exaggerate
the power and importance of their advice. No one likes an astrologer who forecasts doom,
and few want a statistician who admits the answers as desired are not in the data as collected.
Scientists desire results, and they will buy and attend to statisticians and statistical procedures
that promise them. What we end up with is too often horoscopic: vague and optimistic, but
still claiming critical importance.231
Statistical inference is indeed critically important. But only as much as every other part
of research. Scientific discovery is not an additive process, in which sin in one part can
be atoned by virtue in another. Everything interacts.232 So equally when science works as
intended as when it does not, every part of the process deserves our attention. Statistical
analysis can neither be uniquely credited with science’s success, nor can it be uniquely blamed
for its failures and follies.
And there are plenty of failures and follies. Science, you may have heard, is not perfect.
The Lancet is one of the oldest and most prestigious medical journals in the world. This is
what its editor-in-chief, Richard Horton, wrote in its pages in 2015:233
The case against science is straightforward: much of the scientific literature,
perhaps half, may simply be untrue. Afflicted by studies with small sam-
ple sizes, tiny effects, invalid exploratory analyses, and flagrant conflicts of
interest, together with an obsession for pursuing fashionable trends of du-
bious importance, science has taken a turn towards darkness.
How do we know that much of the published scientific literature is untrue? There are two
major methods.
First, it is hard to repeat many published findings, even those in the best journals.234
Some of this lack of repeatability arises from methodological subtleties, not because the find-
ings are false. But many famous findings cannot be repeated, no matter who tries. There is
a sense in which this should be unsurprising, given the nature of statistical testing. See the
565
