16.1. GEOMETRIC PEOPLE
539
h
r
V = πr2h
Figure 16.1. The “Vitruvian Can” model of
human weight as a function of height. If Vit-
ruvian Man were a cylinder, we could estimate
his weight by calculating his volume V as a
function of his height h and radius r.
p of height. This means r = ph. Substituting this into the formula:
V = π(ph)2h = πp2h3
Finally, weight is some proportion of volume—how many kilograms are there per cubic
centimeter? So we need a parameter k that expresses this translation between volume and
weight.
W = kV = kπp2h3
And this is our formula for expected weight, given an individual’s height h. This is not ob-
viously an ordinary generalized linear model. But that’s okay. It makes predictions, and we
can fit it to data.
Rethinking: Spherical cows. Useful mathematical modelling typically involves ridiculous assump-
tions. For example, the assumption above that people are shaped like cylinders. This type of as-
sumption can be called a spherical cow, after the book Consider a Spherical Cow: A Course in
Environmental Problem Solving.220 Strategic, simplifying assumptions are features of all useful mod-
els. By first understanding the simplified model, it is easier to later add in relevant detail, where the
flaws in the simpler model help us decide which details are relevant. Non-mathematical models are
also simplifications, but usually the simplifications are not explicit. This makes it harder to identify
their flaws.221
16.1.2. The statistical model. We can use the cylinder formula in a statistical model. To do
so however, we need to make some more choices. Here’s the model outline. I’ll explain each
piece afterwards.
Wi ∼Log-Normal(µi, σ)
[Distribution for weight]
exp(µi) = kπp2h3
i
[expected median of weight]
k ∼some prior
[prior relation between weight and volume]
p ∼some prior
[prior proportionality of radius to height]
σ ∼Exponential(1)
[our old friend, sigma]
From the top, the first thing to decide is the distribution for the observed outcome variable,
weight Wi. This variable is positive—weight can’t be negative—and continuous. So I’ve cho-
sen a Log-Normal distribution. The Log-Normal distribution is parameterized by the mean
of the logarithm, which is called µi. The median of the Log-Normal is exp(µi). In the model
