566
17. HOROSCOPES
Rethinking box on page 51. But the high false-discovery rate has become a great concern,
partly because many placed unrealistic faith in significance testing and partly because it is
hugely expensive to try to develop drugs and therapies from unrepeatable medical findings.
It is even more expensive to design policy around false nutritional, psychological, economic,
or ecological discoveries.235 But the basic reputation of science is also at stake, all material
costs aside. Why pay attention to breathlessly announced new discoveries, when as many as
half of them will turn out to be false?
Second, the history of the sciences is equal parts wonder and blunder. The periodic ta-
ble of the elements looks impressive now, but its story is unglamorous. There were more
false elemental discoveries than there are current elements in the periodic table.236 Don’t
think that all these false discoveries were performed by frauds and cranks. Enrico Fermi
(1901–1954) was one of the greatest physicists of the 20th century. He discovered two heavy
elements, ausonium (Ao, atomic number 93) and hesperium (Es, atomic number 94). These
atomic numbers are now assigned to neptunium and plutonium, because Fermi had not ac-
tually discovered either. He mistook a mix of lighter already-discovered elements. These
sorts of errors, and many other sorts of errors, were routine on the path to the current peri-
odic table. Its story is one of error, ego, fraud, and correction. Other sciences look similar.
Philosophers of science actually have a term, the pessimistic induction, for the observation
that because most science has been wrong, most science is wrong.237
How can we reconcile such messy history, and widespread contemporary failure, with
obvious successes like General Relativity? Science is a population-level process of variation
and selective retention. It does not operate on individual hypotheses, but rather on popu-
lations of hypotheses. It comprises a mix of dynamics that may, over long periods of time,
reveal the clockwork of nature.238 But these same dynamics generate error. So it’s entirely
possible for most findings at any one point in time to be false but for science in the long
term to still function. This is analogous to how natural selection can adapt a biological pop-
ulation to its environment, even though most individual variation in any one generation is
maladaptive.
What is included in these dynamics? Here’s a list of some salient pieces of the dynamic
of scientific discovery, in no particular order. You might make your own list here, as there’s
nothing special about mine.
(1) Quality of theory and predictions: If most theories are wrong, most findings will be
false positives. Karl Popper argued that all that matters for a theory to be scientific
is that it be falsifiable. But for science to be effective, we must require more of
theory. There was a brief quantitative version of this argument on page 51. A good
theory specifies precise predictions that provide precise tests, and more than one
model is usually necessary.
(2) Dynamics of research funding: Who gets funded, and how does the process select
for particular forms of research? If there are no sources of long-term funding, then
necessary long-term research will not be done. If people who already have funding
judge who getsnew funding, research may becomeoverly conservative andpossibly
corrupt.
(3) Quality of measurement: Research design matters, all agree; but often this is for-
gotten when interpreting statistical analyses. A persistent problem is designs with
low signal-to-noise ratios.239 Poor signal will not mean no findings, just unreliable
ones.
