15.2. MISSING DATA
513
be benign is that the outcome is independent of (d-separated from) them. In this case, H is
independent of D (H ⊥⊥D), because H∗is a collider.
A more intuitive way to think about this scenario is the following. Since the missing val-
ues are completely random, missingness doesn’t necessarily change the overall distribution
of homework scores. It removes data, and that makes estimation less efficient. But missing
homework doesn’t necessarily bias our estimate of the causal effect of studying. You should
try to build a binomial model to estimate the causal effect of S on H, using both the com-
pletely observed data and the data with missing values. There’s a practice problem at the end
of this chapter that asks you to do this.
Now consider DAG (b) in the upper right of Figure 15.4. Here studying influences
whether a dog eats homework, S →D. Suppose for example that students who study a lot
do not play with their dogs. Then the dogs take revenge by eating homework. Again let’s
simulate:
R code
15.10
D <- ifelse( S > 0 , 1 , 0 )
Hm <- H
Hm[D==1] <- NA
Now every student who studies more than average (0) is missing homework. This scenario
isn’t as benign as the previous. But it isn’t doom either. Notice that there is now a non-causal
path (a backdoor path) from H →H∗←D ←S. If we don’t close this path, it will confound
inference along S →H. Luckily, we can close the non-causal path by conditioning on S, and
we want to condition on S anyway. So this scenario isn’t necessarily bad, as long as we can
condition on the variable that influences missingness (the dogs D). Again there is a problem
at the end that asks you to compare inference with all the homework and without missing
homework.
This doesn’t mean there is no danger here. If we get the functions or distributions wrong,
then we may get the wrong answer and the missing data may prevent us from seeing the
absurdity of it in posterior predictive checks. Suppose for example that studying doesn’t
help at all until a student does more than the average amount (0). In that case, we never get
to see homework from those students, so we can’t possibly figure out the function that relates
study effort to homework score.
The next scenario, Figure 15.4 (c), is more difficult. The basic situation is the same:
There is a variable that influences both H and D. Previously this was S. Now it is a new
variable X, the noisy level of the student’s house. In a noisy house, students produce worse
homework, X →H. Simultaneously, dogs in noisy houses tend to misbehave, X →D. I’ve
put a circle around X to signal that it is unobserved. Now when we regress H∗on S, a new
non-causal path is in play: H∗←D ←X →H.
The tricky question, however, is what effect this path has on our estimate of S →H. Let’s
actually code this one out, using the simulated data. Here’s a complete data simulation for
the DAG in Figure 15.4 (c):
R code
15.11
set.seed(501)
N <- 1000
X <- rnorm(N)
S <- rnorm(N)
H <- rbinom( N , size=10 , inv_logit( 2 + S - 2*X ) )
