3.2 Multiple Linear Regression
89
Sales
Radio
TV
FIGURE 3.5. For the Advertising data, a linear regression fit to sales using
TV and radio as predictors. From the pattern of the residuals, we can see that
there is a pronounced non-linear relationship in the data. The positive residuals
(those visible above the surface), tend to lie along the 45-degree line, where TV
and Radio budgets are split evenly. The negative residuals (most not visible), tend
to lie away from this line, where budgets are more lopsided.
which simplifies to (3.15) for a simple linear regression. Thus, models with
more variables can have higher RSE if the decrease in RSS is small relative
to the increase in p.
In addition to looking at the RSE and R2 statistics just discussed, it
can be useful to plot the data. Graphical summaries can reveal problems
with a model that are not visible from numerical statistics. For example,
Figure 3.5 displays a three-dimensional plot of TV and radio versus sales.
We see that some observations lie above and some observations lie below
the least squares regression plane. In particular, the linear model seems to
overestimate sales for instances in which most of the advertising money
was spent exclusively on either TV or radio. It underestimates sales for
instances where the budget was split between the two media. This pro-
nounced non-linear pattern suggests a synergy or interaction effect between interaction
the advertising media, whereby combining the media together results in a
bigger boost to sales than using any single medium. In Section 3.3.2, we
will discuss extending the linear model to accommodate such synergistic
effects through the use of interaction terms.
Four: Predictions
Once we have fit the multiple regression model, it is straightforward to
apply (3.21) in order to predict the response Y on the basis of a set of
values for the predictors X1, X2, . . . , Xp. However, there are three sorts of
uncertainty associated with this prediction.
1. The coefficient estimates ˆβ0, ˆβ1, . . . , ˆβp are estimates for β0, β1, . . . , βp.
That is, the least squares plane
ˆY = ˆβ0 + ˆβ1X1 + · · · + ˆβpXp
