70
3. Linear Regression
2. How strong is the relationship between advertising budget and sales?
Assuming that there is a relationship between advertising and sales,
we would like to know the strength of this relationship. Does knowl-
edge of the advertising budget provide a lot of information about
product sales?
3. Which media are associated with sales?
Are all three media—TV, radio, and newspaper—associated with
sales, or are just one or two of the media associated? To answer this
question, we must find a way to separate out the individual contribu-
tion of each medium to sales when we have spent money on all three
media.
4. How large is the association between each medium and sales?
For every dollar spent on advertising in a particular medium, by
what amount will sales increase? How accurately can we predict this
amount of increase?
5. How accurately can we predict future sales?
For any given level of television, radio, or newspaper advertising, what
is our prediction for sales, and what is the accuracy of this prediction?
6. Is the relationship linear?
If there is approximately a straight-line relationship between advertis-
ing expenditure in the various media and sales, then linear regression
is an appropriate tool. If not, then it may still be possible to trans-
form the predictor or the response so that linear regression can be
used.
7. Is there synergy among the advertising media?
Perhaps spending $50,000 on television advertising and $50,000 on ra-
dio advertising is associated with higher sales than allocating $100,000
to either television or radio individually. In marketing, this is known
as a synergy effect, while in statistics it is called an interaction effect. synergy
interaction
It turns out that linear regression can be used to answer each of these
questions. We will first discuss all of these questions in a general context,
and then return to them in this specific context in Section 3.4.
3.1
Simple Linear Regression
Simple linear regression lives up to its name: it is a very straightforward simple linear
regression
approach for predicting a quantitative response Y on the basis of a sin-
gle predictor variable X. It assumes that there is approximately a linear
relationship between X and Y . Mathematically, we can write this linear
relationship as
Y ≈β0 + β1X.
(3.1)
You might read “≈” as “is approximately modeled as”. We will sometimes
describe (3.1) by saying that we are regressing Y on X (or Y onto X).
