2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy
27
measurement. For the remaining n −m observations, we have predictor
measurements but no response measurement. Such a scenario can arise if
the predictors can be measured relatively cheaply but the corresponding
responses are much more expensive to collect. We refer to this setting as
a semi-supervised learning problem. In this setting, we wish to use a sta- semi-
supervised
learning
tistical learning method that can incorporate the m observations for which
response measurements are available as well as the n −m observations for
which they are not. Although this is an interesting topic, it is beyond the
scope of this book.
2.1.5
Regression Versus Classification Problems
Variables can be characterized as either quantitative or qualitative (also quantitative
qualitative
known as categorical). Quantitative variables take on numerical values. Ex-
categorical
amples include a person’s age, height, or income, the value of a house, and
the price of a stock. In contrast, qualitative variables take on values in
one of K different classes, or categories. Examples of qualitative variables class
include a person’s marital status (married or not), the brand of product
purchased (brand A, B, or C), whether a person defaults on a debt (yes
or no), or a cancer diagnosis (Acute Myelogenous Leukemia, Acute Lym-
phoblastic Leukemia, or No Leukemia). We tend to refer to problems with
a quantitative response as regression problems, while those involving a regression
qualitative response are often referred to as classification problems. How- classification
ever, the distinction is not always that crisp. Least squares linear regression
(Chapter 3) is used with a quantitative response, whereas logistic regression
(Chapter 4) is typically used with a qualitative (two-class, or binary) re- binary
sponse. Thus, despite its name, logistic regression is a classification method.
But since it estimates class probabilities, it can be thought of as a regres-
sion method as well. Some statistical methods, such as K-nearest neighbors
(Chapters 2 and 4) and boosting (Chapter 8), can be used in the case of
either quantitative or qualitative responses.
We tend to select statistical learning methods on the basis of whether
the response is quantitative or qualitative; i.e. we might use linear regres-
sion when quantitative and logistic regression when qualitative. However,
whether the predictors are qualitative or quantitative is generally consid-
ered less important. Most of the statistical learning methods discussed in
this book can be applied regardless of the predictor variable type, provided
that any qualitative predictors are properly coded before the analysis is
performed. This is discussed in Chapter 3.
2.2
Assessing Model Accuracy
One of the key aims of this book is to introduce the reader to a wide range
of statistical learning methods that extend far beyond the standard linear
regression approach. Why is it necessary to introduce so many different
statistical learning approaches, rather than just a single best method? There
is no free lunch in statistics: no one method dominates all others over all
possible data sets. On a particular data set, one specific method may work
