3.2 Multiple Linear Regression
87
X2 only, and (4) a model containing both X1 and X2. We can then se-
lect the best model out of all of the models that we have considered. How
do we determine which model is best? Various statistics can be used to
judge the quality of a model. These include Mallow’s Cp, Akaike informa- Mallow’s Cp
tion criterion (AIC), Bayesian information criterion (BIC), and adjusted
Akaike
information
criterion
Bayesian
information
criterion
R2. These are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6. We can also deter-
adjusted R2
mine which model is best by plotting various model outputs, such as the
residuals, in order to search for patterns.
Unfortunately, there are a total of 2p models that contain subsets of p
variables. This means that even for moderate p, trying out every possible
subset of the predictors is infeasible. For instance, we saw that if p = 2, then
there are 22 = 4 models to consider. But if p = 30, then we must consider
230 = 1,073,741,824 models! This is not practical. Therefore, unless p is very
small, we cannot consider all 2p models, and instead we need an automated
and efficient approach to choose a smaller set of models to consider. There
are three classical approaches for this task:
• Forward selection. We begin with the null model—a model that con- forward
selection
null model
tains an intercept but no predictors. We then fit p simple linear re-
gressions and add to the null model the variable that results in the
lowest RSS. We then add to that model the variable that results
in the lowest RSS for the new two-variable model. This approach is
continued until some stopping rule is satisfied.
• Backward selection. We start with all variables in the model, and backward
selection
remove the variable with the largest p-value—that is, the variable
that is the least statistically significant. The new (p −1)-variable
model is fit, and the variable with the largest p-value is removed. This
procedure continues until a stopping rule is reached. For instance, we
may stop when all remaining variables have a p-value below some
threshold.
• Mixed selection. This is a combination of forward and backward se- mixed
selection
lection. We start with no variables in the model, and as with forward
selection, we add the variable that provides the best fit. We con-
tinue to add variables one-by-one. Of course, as we noted with the
Advertising example, the p-values for variables can become larger as
new predictors are added to the model. Hence, if at any point the
p-value for one of the variables in the model rises above a certain
threshold, then we remove that variable from the model. We con-
tinue to perform these forward and backward steps until all variables
in the model have a sufficiently low p-value, and all variables outside
the model would have a large p-value if added to the model.
Backward selection cannot be used if p > n, while forward selection can
always be used. Forward selection is a greedy approach, and might include
variables early that later become redundant. Mixed selection can remedy
this.
