86
3. Linear Regression
For instance, consider an example in which p = 100 and H0 : β1 = β2 =
· · · = βp = 0 is true, so no variable is truly associated with the response. In
this situation, about 5 % of the p-values associated with each variable (of
the type shown in Table 3.4) will be below 0.05 by chance. In other words,
we expect to see approximately five small p-values even in the absence of
any true association between the predictors and the response.8 In fact, it
is likely that we will observe at least one p-value below 0.05 by chance!
Hence, if we use the individual t-statistics and associated p-values in order
to decide whether or not there is any association between the variables and
the response, there is a very high chance that we will incorrectly conclude
that there is a relationship. However, the F-statistic does not suffer from
this problem because it adjusts for the number of predictors. Hence, if H0
is true, there is only a 5 % chance that the F-statistic will result in a p-
value below 0.05, regardless of the number of predictors or the number of
observations.
The approach of using an F-statistic to test for any association between
the predictors and the response works when p is relatively small, and cer-
tainly small compared to n. However, sometimes we have a very large num-
ber of variables. If p > n then there are more coefficients βj to estimate
than observations from which to estimate them. In this case we cannot
even fit the multiple linear regression model using least squares, so the F-
statistic cannot be used, and neither can most of the other concepts that
we have seen so far in this chapter. When p is large, some of the approaches
discussed in the next section, such as forward selection, can be used. This
high-dimensional setting is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.
high-
dimensional
Two: Deciding on Important Variables
As discussed in the previous section, the first step in a multiple regression
analysis is to compute the F-statistic and to examine the associated p-
value. If we conclude on the basis of that p-value that at least one of the
predictors is related to the response, then it is natural to wonder which are
the guilty ones! We could look at the individual p-values as in Table 3.4,
but as discussed (and as further explored in Chapter 13), if p is large we
are likely to make some false discoveries.
It is possible that all of the predictors are associated with the response,
but it is more often the case that the response is only associated with
a subset of the predictors. The task of determining which predictors are
associated with the response, in order to fit a single model involving only
those predictors, is referred to as variable selection. The variable selection variable
selection
problem is studied extensively in Chapter 6, and so here we will provide
only a brief outline of some classical approaches.
Ideally, we would like to perform variable selection by trying out a lot of
different models, each containing a different subset of the predictors. For
instance, if p = 2, then we can consider four models: (1) a model contain-
ing no variables, (2) a model containing X1 only, (3) a model containing
8This is related to the important concept of multiple testing, which is the focus of
Chapter 13.
