2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?
21
Years of Education
Seniority
Income
FIGURE 2.4.
A linear model fit by least squares to the Income data from
Figure 2.3. The observations are shown in red, and the yellow plane indicates the
least squares fit to the data.
2. After a model has been selected, we need a procedure that uses the
training data to fit or train the model. In the case of the linear model fit
train
(2.4), we need to estimate the parameters β0, β1, . . . , βp. That is, we
want to find values of these parameters such that
Y ≈β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + · · · + βpXp.
The most common approach to fitting the model (2.4) is referred to
as (ordinary) least squares, which we discuss in Chapter 3. However, least squares
least squares is one of many possible ways to fit the linear model. In
Chapter 6, we discuss other approaches for estimating the parameters
in (2.4).
The model-based approach just described is referred to as parametric;
it reduces the problem of estimating f down to one of estimating a set of
parameters. Assuming a parametric form for f simplifies the problem of
estimating f because it is generally much easier to estimate a set of pa-
rameters, such as β0, β1, . . . , βp in the linear model (2.4), than it is to fit
an entirely arbitrary function f. The potential disadvantage of a paramet-
ric approach is that the model we choose will usually not match the true
unknown form of f. If the chosen model is too far from the true f, then
our estimate will be poor. We can try to address this problem by choos-
ing flexible models that can fit many different possible functional forms flexible
for f. But in general, fitting a more flexible model requires estimating a
greater number of parameters. These more complex models can lead to a
phenomenon known as overfitting the data, which essentially means they overfitting
follow the errors, or noise, too closely. These issues are discussed through- noise
out this book.
Figure 2.4 shows an example of the parametric approach applied to the
Income data from Figure 2.3. We have fit a linear model of the form
income ≈β0 + β1 × education + β2 × seniority.
