2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?
17
output variable is in general unknown. In this situation one must estimate
f based on the observed points. Since Income is a simulated data set, f is
known and is shown by the blue curve in the right-hand panel of Figure 2.2.
The vertical lines represent the error terms ϵ. We note that some of the
30 observations lie above the blue curve and some lie below it; overall, the
errors have approximately mean zero.
In general, the function f may involve more than one input variable.
In Figure 2.3 we plot income as a function of years of education and
seniority. Here f is a two-dimensional surface that must be estimated
based on the observed data.
In essence, statistical learning refers to a set of approaches for estimating
f. In this chapter we outline some of the key theoretical concepts that arise
in estimating f, as well as tools for evaluating the estimates obtained.
2.1.1
Why Estimate f?
There are two main reasons that we may wish to estimate f: prediction
and inference. We discuss each in turn.
Prediction
In many situations, a set of inputs X are readily available, but the output
Y cannot be easily obtained. In this setting, since the error term averages
to zero, we can predict Y using
ˆY = ˆf(X),
(2.2)
where ˆf represents our estimate for f, and ˆY represents the resulting pre-
diction for Y . In this setting, ˆf is often treated as a black box, in the sense
that one is not typically concerned with the exact form of ˆf, provided that
it yields accurate predictions for Y .
As an example, suppose that X1, . . . , Xp are characteristics of a patient’s
blood sample that can be easily measured in a lab, and Y is a variable
encoding the patient’s risk for a severe adverse reaction to a particular
drug. It is natural to seek to predict Y using X, since we can then avoid
giving the drug in question to patients who are at high risk of an adverse
reaction—that is, patients for whom the estimate of Y is high.
The accuracy of ˆY as a prediction for Y depends on two quantities,
which we will call the reducible error and the irreducible error. In general, reducible
error
irreducible
error
ˆf will not be a perfect estimate for f, and this inaccuracy will introduce
some error. This error is reducible because we can potentially improve the
accuracy of ˆf by using the most appropriate statistical learning technique to
estimate f. However, even if it were possible to form a perfect estimate for
f, so that our estimated response took the form ˆY = f(X), our prediction
would still have some error in it! This is because Y is also a function of
ϵ, which, by definition, cannot be predicted using X. Therefore, variability
associated with ϵ also affects the accuracy of our predictions. This is known
as the irreducible error, because no matter how well we estimate f, we
cannot reduce the error introduced by ϵ.
Why is the irreducible error larger than zero? The quantity ϵ may con-
tain unmeasured variables that are useful in predicting Y : since we don’t
