4
1. Introduction
Down
Up
0.46
0.48
0.50
0.52
Today’s Direction
Predicted Probability
FIGURE 1.3. We fit a quadratic discriminant analysis model to the subset
of the Smarket data corresponding to the 2001–2004 time period, and predicted
the probability of a stock market decrease using the 2005 data. On average, the
predicted probability of decrease is higher for the days in which the market does
decrease. Based on these results, we are able to correctly predict the direction of
movement in the market 60% of the time.
clustering problem. Unlike in the previous examples, here we are not trying
to predict an output variable.
We devote Chapter 12 to a discussion of statistical learning methods
for problems in which no natural output variable is available. We consider
the NCI60 data set, which consists of 6,830 gene expression measurements
for each of 64 cancer cell lines. Instead of predicting a particular output
variable, we are interested in determining whether there are groups, or
clusters, among the cell lines based on their gene expression measurements.
This is a difficult question to address, in part because there are thousands
of gene expression measurements per cell line, making it hard to visualize
the data.
The left-hand panel of Figure 1.4 addresses this problem by represent-
ing each of the 64 cell lines using just two numbers, Z1 and Z2. These
are the first two principal components of the data, which summarize the
6,830 expression measurements for each cell line down to two numbers or
dimensions. While it is likely that this dimension reduction has resulted in
some loss of information, it is now possible to visually examine the data
for evidence of clustering. Deciding on the number of clusters is often a
difficult problem. But the left-hand panel of Figure 1.4 suggests at least
four groups of cell lines, which we have represented using separate colors.
In this particular data set, it turns out that the cell lines correspond
to 14 different types of cancer. (However, this information was not used
to create the left-hand panel of Figure 1.4.) The right-hand panel of Fig-
ure 1.4 is identical to the left-hand panel, except that the 14 cancer types
are shown using distinct colored symbols. There is clear evidence that cell
lines with the same cancer type tend to be located near each other in this
two-dimensional representation. In addition, even though the cancer infor-
mation was not used to produce the left-hand panel, the clustering obtained
does bear some resemblance to some of the actual cancer types observed
in the right-hand panel. This provides some independent verification of the
accuracy of our clustering analysis.
