2
Statistical Learning
2.1
What Is Statistical Learning?
In order to motivate our study of statistical learning, we begin with a simple
example. Suppose that we are statistical consultants hired by a client to
investigate the association between advertising and sales of a particular
product. The Advertising data set consists of the sales of that product
in 200 different markets, along with advertising budgets for the product in
each of those markets for three different media: TV, radio, and newspaper.
The data are displayed in Figure 2.1. It is not possible for our client to
directly increase sales of the product. On the other hand, they can control
the advertising expenditure in each of the three media. Therefore, if we
determine that there is an association between advertising and sales, then
we can instruct our client to adjust advertising budgets, thereby indirectly
increasing sales. In other words, our goal is to develop an accurate model
that can be used to predict sales on the basis of the three media budgets.
In this setting, the advertising budgets are input variables while sales input
variable
is an output variable. The input variables are typically denoted using the
output
variable
symbol X, with a subscript to distinguish them. So X1 might be the TV
budget, X2 the radio budget, and X3 the newspaper budget. The inputs
go by different names, such as predictors, independent variables, features, predictor
independent
variable
feature
or sometimes just variables. The output variable—in this case, sales—is
variable
often called the response or dependent variable, and is typically denoted
response
dependent
variable
using the symbol Y . Throughout this book, we will use all of these terms
interchangeably.
More generally, suppose that we observe a quantitative response Y and p
different predictors, X1, X2, . . . , Xp. We assume that there is some
relationship between Y and X = (X1, X2, . . . , Xp), which can be written
in the very general form
Y = f(X) + ϵ.
(2.1)
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_2 
15
