66
2. Statistical Learning
This has used the first column in the file as an index for the
data frame. This means that pandas has given each row a name
corresponding to the appropriate university. Now you should see
that the first data column is Private. Note that the names of
the colleges appear on the left of the table. We also introduced
a new python object above: a dictionary, which is specified by dictionary
(key, value) pairs. Keep your modified version of the data with
the following:
college = college3
(c) Use the describe() method of to produce a numerical summary
of the variables in the data set.
(d) Use the pd.plotting.scatter_matrix() function to produce a
scatterplot matrix of the first columns [Top10perc, Apps, Enroll].
Recall that you can reference a list C of columns of a data frame
A using A[C].
(e) Use the boxplot() method of college to produce side-by-side
boxplots of Outstate versus Private.
(f) Create a new qualitative variable, called Elite, by binning the
Top10perc variable into two groups based on whether or not the
proportion of students coming from the top 10% of their high
school classes exceeds 50%.
college['Elite'] = pd.cut(college['Top10perc'],
[0,0.5,1],
labels=['No', 'Yes'])
Use the value_counts() method of college['Elite'] to see how
many elite universities there are. Finally, use the boxplot() method
again to produce side-by-side boxplots of Outstate versus Elite.
(g) Use the plot.hist() method of college to produce some his-
tograms with differing numbers of bins for a few of the quanti-
tative variables. The command plt.subplots(2, 2) may be use-
ful: it will divide the plot window into four regions so that four
plots can be made simultaneously. By changing the arguments
you can divide the screen up in other combinations.
(h) Continue exploring the data, and provide a brief summary of
what you discover.
9. This exercise involves the Auto data set studied in the lab. Make sure
that the missing values have been removed from the data.
(a) Which of the predictors are quantitative, and which are quali-
tative?
(b) What is the range of each quantitative predictor? You can an-
swer this using the min() and max() methods in numpy.
.min()
.max()
(c) What is the mean and standard deviation of each quantitative
predictor?
