2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy
37
teger K and a test observation x0, the KNN classifier first identifies the
K points in the training data that are closest to x0, represented by N0.
It then estimates the conditional probability for class j as the fraction of
points in N0 whose response values equal j:
Pr(Y = j|X = x0) = 1
K
0
i∈N0
I(yi = j).
(2.12)
Finally, KNN classifies the test observation x0 to the class with the largest
probability from (2.12).
Figure 2.14 provides an illustrative example of the KNN approach. In
the left-hand panel, we have plotted a small training data set consisting of
six blue and six orange observations. Our goal is to make a prediction for
the point labeled by the black cross. Suppose that we choose K = 3. Then
KNN will first identify the three observations that are closest to the cross.
This neighborhood is shown as a circle. It consists of two blue points and
one orange point, resulting in estimated probabilities of 2/3 for the blue
class and 1/3 for the orange class. Hence KNN will predict that the black
cross belongs to the blue class. In the right-hand panel of Figure 2.14 we
have applied the KNN approach with K = 3 at all of the possible values for
X1 and X2, and have drawn in the corresponding KNN decision boundary.
Despite the fact that it is a very simple approach, KNN can often pro-
duce classifiers that are surprisingly close to the optimal Bayes classifier.
Figure 2.15 displays the KNN decision boundary, using K = 10, when ap-
plied to the larger simulated data set from Figure 2.13. Notice that even
though the true distribution is not known by the KNN classifier, the KNN
decision boundary is very close to that of the Bayes classifier. The test error
rate using KNN is 0.1363, which is close to the Bayes error rate of 0.1304.
The choice of K has a drastic effect on the KNN classifier obtained.
Figure 2.16 displays two KNN fits to the simulated data from Figure 2.13,
using K = 1 and K = 100. When K = 1, the decision boundary is overly
flexible and finds patterns in the data that don’t correspond to the Bayes
decision boundary. This corresponds to a classifier that has low bias but
very high variance. As K grows, the method becomes less flexible and
produces a decision boundary that is close to linear. This corresponds to
a low-variance but high-bias classifier. On this simulated data set, neither
K = 1 nor K = 100 give good predictions: they have test error rates of
0.1695 and 0.1925, respectively.
Just as in the regression setting, there is not a strong relationship be-
tween the training error rate and the test error rate. With K = 1, the
KNN training error rate is 0, but the test error rate may be quite high. In
general, as we use more flexible classification methods, the training error
rate will decline but the test error rate may not. In Figure 2.17, we have
plotted the KNN test and training errors as a function of 1/K. As 1/K in-
creases, the method becomes more flexible. As in the regression setting, the
training error rate consistently declines as the flexibility increases. However,
the test error exhibits a characteristic U-shape, declining at first (with a
minimum at approximately K = 10) before increasing again when the
method becomes excessively flexible and overfits.
