2.4 Exercises
63
2.4
Exercises
Conceptual
1. For each of parts (a) through (d), indicate whether we would generally
expect the performance of a flexible statistical learning method to be
better or worse than an inflexible method. Justify your answer.
(a) The sample size n is extremely large, and the number of predic-
tors p is small.
(b) The number of predictors p is extremely large, and the number
of observations n is small.
(c) The relationship between the predictors and response is highly
non-linear.
(d) The variance of the error terms, i.e. σ2 = Var(ϵ), is extremely
high.
2. Explain whether each scenario is a classification or regression prob-
lem, and indicate whether we are most interested in inference or pre-
diction. Finally, provide n and p.
(a) We collect a set of data on the top 500 firms in the US. For each
firm we record profit, number of employees, industry and the
CEO salary. We are interested in understanding which factors
affect CEO salary.
(b) We are considering launching a new product and wish to know
whether it will be a success or a failure. We collect data on 20
similar products that were previously launched. For each prod-
uct we have recorded whether it was a success or failure, price
charged for the product, marketing budget, competition price,
and ten other variables.
(c) We are interested in predicting the % change in the USD/Euro
exchange rate in relation to the weekly changes in the world
stock markets. Hence we collect weekly data for all of 2012. For
each week we record the % change in the USD/Euro, the %
change in the US market, the % change in the British market,
and the % change in the German market.
3. We now revisit the bias-variance decomposition.
(a) Provide a sketch of typical (squared) bias, variance, training er-
ror, test error, and Bayes (or irreducible) error curves, on a sin-
gle plot, as we go from less flexible statistical learning methods
towards more flexible approaches. The x-axis should represent
the amount of flexibility in the method, and the y-axis should
represent the values for each curve. There should be five curves.
Make sure to label each one.
(b) Explain why each of the five curves has the shape displayed in
part (a).
