2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy
29
0
20
40
60
80
100
2
4
6
8
10
12
X
Y
2
5
10
20
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Flexibility
Mean Squared Error
FIGURE 2.9. Left: Data simulated from f, shown in black. Three estimates of
f are shown: the linear regression line (orange curve), and two smoothing spline
fits (blue and green curves). Right: Training MSE (grey curve), test MSE (red
curve), and minimum possible test MSE over all methods (dashed line). Squares
represent the training and test MSEs for the three fits shown in the left-hand
panel.
If these are approximately equal to y1, y2, . . . , yn, then the training MSE
given by (2.5) is small. However, we are really not interested in whether
ˆf(xi) ≈yi; instead, we want to know whether ˆf(x0) is approximately equal
to y0, where (x0, y0) is a previously unseen test observation not used to train
the statistical learning method. We want to choose the method that gives
the lowest test MSE, as opposed to the lowest training MSE. In other words, test MSE
if we had a large number of test observations, we could compute
Ave(y0 −ˆf(x0))2,
(2.6)
the average squared prediction error for these test observations (x0, y0).
We’d like to select the model for which this quantity is as small as possible.
How can we go about trying to select a method that minimizes the test
MSE? In some settings, we may have a test data set available—that is,
we may have access to a set of observations that were not used to train
the statistical learning method. We can then simply evaluate (2.6) on the
test observations, and select the learning method for which the test MSE is
smallest. But what if no test observations are available? In that case, one
might imagine simply selecting a statistical learning method that minimizes
the training MSE (2.5). This seems like it might be a sensible approach,
since the training MSE and the test MSE appear to be closely related.
Unfortunately, there is a fundamental problem with this strategy: there
is no guarantee that the method with the lowest training MSE will also
have the lowest test MSE. Roughly speaking, the problem is that many
statistical methods specifically estimate coefficients so as to minimize the
training set MSE. For these methods, the training set MSE can be quite
small, but the test MSE is often much larger.
Figure 2.9 illustrates this phenomenon on a simple example. In the left-
hand panel of Figure 2.9, we have generated observations from (2.1) with
