90
3. Linear Regression
is only an estimate for the true population regression plane
f(X) = β0 + β1X1 + · · · + βpXp.
The inaccuracy in the coefficient estimates is related to the reducible
error from Chapter 2. We can compute a confidence interval in order
to determine how close ˆY will be to f(X).
2. Of course, in practice assuming a linear model for f(X) is almost
always an approximation of reality, so there is an additional source of
potentially reducible error which we call model bias. So when we use a
linear model, we are in fact estimating the best linear approximation
to the true surface. However, here we will ignore this discrepancy,
and operate as if the linear model were correct.
3. Even if we knew f(X)—that is, even if we knew the true values
for β0, β1, . . . , βp—the response value cannot be predicted perfectly
because of the random error ϵ in the model (3.20). In Chapter 2, we
referred to this as the irreducible error. How much will Y vary from
ˆY ? We use prediction intervals to answer this question. Prediction
intervals are always wider than confidence intervals, because they
incorporate both the error in the estimate for f(X) (the reducible
error) and the uncertainty as to how much an individual point will
differ from the population regression plane (the irreducible error).
We use a confidence interval to quantify the uncertainty surrounding confidence
interval
the average sales over a large number of cities. For example, given that
$100,000 is spent on TV advertising and $20,000 is spent on radio advertising
in each city, the 95 % confidence interval is [10,985, 11,528]. We interpret
this to mean that 95 % of intervals of this form will contain the true value of
f(X).9 On the other hand, a prediction interval can be used to quantify the prediction
interval
uncertainty surrounding sales for a particular city. Given that $100,000 is
spent on TV advertising and $20,000 is spent on radio advertising in that city
the 95 % prediction interval is [7,930, 14,580]. We interpret this to mean
that 95 % of intervals of this form will contain the true value of Y for this
city. Note that both intervals are centered at 11,256, but that the prediction
interval is substantially wider than the confidence interval, reflecting the
increased uncertainty about sales for a given city in comparison to the
average sales over many locations.
9In other words, if we collect a large number of data sets like the Advertising data
set, and we construct a confidence interval for the average sales on the basis of each
data set (given $100,000 in TV and $20,000 in radio advertising), then 95 % of these
confidence intervals will contain the true value of average sales.
