2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?
25
We have established that when inference is the goal, there are clear ad-
vantages to using simple and relatively inflexible statistical learning meth-
ods. In some settings, however, we are only interested in prediction, and
the interpretability of the predictive model is simply not of interest. For
instance, if we seek to develop an algorithm to predict the price of a
stock, our sole requirement for the algorithm is that it predict accurately—
interpretability is not a concern. In this setting, we might expect that it
will be best to use the most flexible model available. Surprisingly, this is
not always the case! We will often obtain more accurate predictions using
a less flexible method. This phenomenon, which may seem counterintu-
itive at first glance, has to do with the potential for overfitting in highly
flexible methods. We saw an example of overfitting in Figure 2.6. We will
discuss this very important concept further in Section 2.2 and throughout
this book.
2.1.4
Supervised Versus Unsupervised Learning
Most statistical learning problems fall into one of two categories: supervised supervised
or unsupervised. The examples that we have discussed so far in this chap- unsupervised
ter all fall into the supervised learning domain. For each observation of the
predictor measurement(s) xi, i = 1, . . . , n there is an associated response
measurement yi. We wish to fit a model that relates the response to the
predictors, with the aim of accurately predicting the response for future
observations (prediction) or better understanding the relationship between
the response and the predictors (inference). Many classical statistical learn-
ing methods such as linear regression and logistic regression (Chapter 4), as logistic
regression
well as more modern approaches such as GAM, boosting, and support vec-
tor machines, operate in the supervised learning domain. The vast majority
of this book is devoted to this setting.
By contrast, unsupervised learning describes the somewhat more chal-
lenging situation in which for every observation i = 1, . . . , n, we observe
a vector of measurements xi but no associated response yi. It is not pos-
sible to fit a linear regression model, since there is no response variable
to predict. In this setting, we are in some sense working blind; the sit-
uation is referred to as unsupervised because we lack a response vari-
able that can supervise our analysis. What sort of statistical analysis is
possible? We can seek to understand the relationships between the variables
or between the observations. One statistical learning tool that we may use
in this setting is cluster analysis, or clustering. The goal of cluster analysis cluster
analysis
is to ascertain, on the basis of x1, . . . , xn, whether the observations fall into
relatively distinct groups. For example, in a market segmentation study we
might observe multiple characteristics (variables) for potential customers,
such as zip code, family income, and shopping habits. We might believe
that the customers fall into different groups, such as big spenders versus
low spenders. If the information about each customer’s spending patterns
were available, then a supervised analysis would be possible. However, this
information is not available—that is, we do not know whether each poten-
tial customer is a big spender or not. In this setting, we can try to cluster
the customers on the basis of the variables measured, in order to identify
