34
2. Statistical Learning
of these three quantities. In all three cases, the variance increases and the
bias decreases as the method’s flexibility increases. However, the flexibility
level corresponding to the optimal test MSE differs considerably among the
three data sets, because the squared bias and variance change at different
rates in each of the data sets. In the left-hand panel of Figure 2.12, the
bias initially decreases rapidly, resulting in an initial sharp decrease in the
expected test MSE. On the other hand, in the center panel of Figure 2.12
the true f is close to linear, so there is only a small decrease in bias as flex-
ibility increases, and the test MSE only declines slightly before increasing
rapidly as the variance increases. Finally, in the right-hand panel of Fig-
ure 2.12, as flexibility increases, there is a dramatic decline in bias because
the true f is very non-linear. There is also very little increase in variance
as flexibility increases. Consequently, the test MSE declines substantially
before experiencing a small increase as model flexibility increases.
The relationship between bias, variance, and test set MSE given in Equa-
tion 2.7 and displayed in Figure 2.12 is referred to as the bias-variance
trade-off. Good test set performance of a statistical learning method re- bias-variance
trade-off
quires low variance as well as low squared bias. This is referred to as a
trade-off because it is easy to obtain a method with extremely low bias but
high variance (for instance, by drawing a curve that passes through every
single training observation) or a method with very low variance but high
bias (by fitting a horizontal line to the data). The challenge lies in finding
a method for which both the variance and the squared bias are low. This
trade-off is one of the most important recurring themes in this book.
In a real-life situation in which f is unobserved, it is generally not pos-
sible to explicitly compute the test MSE, bias, or variance for a statistical
learning method. Nevertheless, one should always keep the bias-variance
trade-off in mind. In this book we explore methods that are extremely
flexible and hence can essentially eliminate bias. However, this does not
guarantee that they will outperform a much simpler method such as linear
regression. To take an extreme example, suppose that the true f is linear.
In this situation linear regression will have no bias, making it very hard
for a more flexible method to compete. In contrast, if the true f is highly
non-linear and we have an ample number of training observations, then
we may do better using a highly flexible approach, as in Figure 2.11. In
Chapter 5 we discuss cross-validation, which is a way to estimate the test
MSE using the training data.
2.2.3
The Classification Setting
Thus far, our discussion of model accuracy has been focused on the regres-
sion setting. But many of the concepts that we have encountered, such
as the bias-variance trade-off, transfer over to the classification setting
with only some modifications due to the fact that yi is no longer quan-
titative. Suppose that we seek to estimate f on the basis of training obser-
vations {(x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn)}, where now y1, . . . , yn are qualitative. The
most common approach for quantifying the accuracy of our estimate ˆf is
the training error rate, the proportion of mistakes that are made if we apply error rate
