Preface
Statistical learning refers to a set of tools for making sense of complex
datasets. In recent years, we have seen a staggering increase in the scale and
scope of data collection across virtually all areas of science and industry.
As a result, statistical learning has become a critical toolkit for anyone who
wishes to understand data — and as more and more of today’s jobs involve
data, this means that statistical learning is fast becoming a critical toolkit
for everyone.
One of the first books on statistical learning — The Elements of Statisti-
cal Learning (ESL, by Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman) — was published
in 2001, with a second edition in 2009. ESL has become a popular text not
only in statistics but also in related fields. One of the reasons for ESL’s
popularity is its relatively accessible style. But ESL is best-suited for indi-
viduals with advanced training in the mathematical sciences.
An Introduction to Statistical Learning, With Applications in R (ISLR)
— first published in 2013, with a second edition in 2021 — arose from
the clear need for a broader and less technical treatment of the key topics
in statistical learning. In addition to a review of linear regression, ISLR
covers many of today’s most important statistical and machine learning
approaches, including resampling, sparse methods for classification and re-
gression, generalized additive models, tree-based methods, support vector
machines, deep learning, survival analysis, clustering, and multiple testing.
Since it was published in 2013, ISLR has become a mainstay of un-
dergraduate and graduate classrooms worldwide, as well as an important
reference book for data scientists. One of the keys to its success has been
that, beginning with Chapter 2, each chapter contains an R lab illustrating
how to implement the statistical learning methods seen in that chapter,
providing the reader with valuable hands-on experience.
However, in recent years Python has become an increasingly popular lan-
guage for data science, and there has been increasing demand for a Python-
vii
