2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy
31
0
20
40
60
80
100
2
4
6
8
10
12
X
Y
2
5
10
20
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Flexibility
Mean Squared Error
FIGURE 2.10.
Details are as in Figure 2.9, using a different true f that is
much closer to linear. In this setting, linear regression provides a very good fit to
the data.
patterns that the method found in the training data simply don’t exist
in the test data. Note that regardless of whether or not overfitting has
occurred, we almost always expect the training MSE to be smaller than
the test MSE because most statistical learning methods either directly or
indirectly seek to minimize the training MSE. Overfitting refers specifically
to the case in which a less flexible model would have yielded a smaller
test MSE.
Figure 2.10 provides another example in which the true f is approxi-
mately linear. Again we observe that the training MSE decreases mono-
tonically as the model flexibility increases, and that there is a U-shape in
the test MSE. However, because the truth is close to linear, the test MSE
only decreases slightly before increasing again, so that the orange least
squares fit is substantially better than the highly flexible green curve. Fi-
nally, Figure 2.11 displays an example in which f is highly non-linear. The
training and test MSE curves still exhibit the same general patterns, but
now there is a rapid decrease in both curves before the test MSE starts to
increase slowly.
In practice, one can usually compute the training MSE with relative
ease, but estimating the test MSE is considerably more difficult because
usually no test data are available. As the previous three examples illustrate,
the flexibility level corresponding to the model with the minimal test MSE
can vary considerably among data sets. Throughout this book, we discuss a
variety of approaches that can be used in practice to estimate this minimum
point. One important method is cross-validation (Chapter 5), which is a cross-
validation
method for estimating the test MSE using the training data.
2.2.2
The Bias-Variance Trade-Off
The U-shape observed in the test MSE curves (Figures 2.9–2.11) turns out
to be the result of two competing properties of statistical learning methods.
