3.2 Multiple Linear Regression
85
Quantity
Value
Residual standard error
1.69
R2
0.897
F-statistic
570
TABLE 3.6. More information about the least squares model for the regression
of number of units sold on TV, newspaper, and radio advertising budgets in the
Advertising data. Other information about this model was displayed in Table 3.4.
conclude that there is a relationship? It turns out that the answer depends
on the values of n and p. When n is large, an F-statistic that is just a
little larger than 1 might still provide evidence against H0. In contrast,
a larger F-statistic is needed to reject H0 if n is small. When H0 is true
and the errors ϵi have a normal distribution, the F-statistic follows an
F-distribution.6 For any given value of n and p, any statistical software
package can be used to compute the p-value associated with the F-statistic
using this distribution. Based on this p-value, we can determine whether
or not to reject H0. For the advertising data, the p-value associated with
the F-statistic in Table 3.6 is essentially zero, so we have extremely strong
evidence that at least one of the media is associated with increased sales.
In (3.23) we are testing H0 that all the coefficients are zero. Sometimes
we want to test that a particular subset of q of the coefficients are zero.
This corresponds to a null hypothesis
H0 :
βp−q+1 = βp−q+2 = · · · = βp = 0,
where for convenience we have put the variables chosen for omission at the
end of the list. In this case we fit a second model that uses all the variables
except those last q. Suppose that the residual sum of squares for that model
is RSS0. Then the appropriate F-statistic is
F = (RSS0 −RSS)/q
RSS/(n −p −1).
(3.24)
Notice that in Table 3.4, for each individual predictor a t-statistic and
a p-value were reported. These provide information about whether each
individual predictor is related to the response, after adjusting for the other
predictors. It turns out that each of these is exactly equivalent7 to the F-
test that omits that single variable from the model, leaving all the others
in—i.e. q=1 in (3.24). So it reports the partial effect of adding that variable
to the model. For instance, as we discussed earlier, these p-values indicate
that TV and radio are related to sales, but that there is no evidence that
newspaper is associated with sales, when TV and radio are held fixed.
Given these individual p-values for each variable, why do we need to look
at the overall F-statistic? After all, it seems likely that if any one of the
p-values for the individual variables is very small, then at least one of the
predictors is related to the response. However, this logic is flawed, especially
when the number of predictors p is large.
6Even if the errors are not normally-distributed, the F-statistic approximately follows
an F-distribution provided that the sample size n is large.
7The square of each t-statistic is the corresponding F-statistic.
