20
2. Statistical Learning
of homes to inputs such as crime rate, zoning, distance from a river, air
quality, schools, income level of community, size of houses, and so forth. In
this case one might be interested in the association between each individ-
ual input variable and housing price—for instance, how much extra will a
house be worth if it has a view of the river? This is an inference problem.
Alternatively, one may simply be interested in predicting the value of a
home given its characteristics: is this house under- or over-valued? This is
a prediction problem.
Depending on whether our ultimate goal is prediction, inference, or a
combination of the two, different methods for estimating f may be ap-
propriate. For example, linear models allow for relatively simple and in- linear model
terpretable inference, but may not yield as accurate predictions as some
other approaches. In contrast, some of the highly non-linear approaches
that we discuss in the later chapters of this book can potentially provide
quite accurate predictions for Y , but this comes at the expense of a less
interpretable model for which inference is more challenging.
2.1.2
How Do We Estimate f?
Throughout this book, we explore many linear and non-linear approaches
for estimating f. However, these methods generally share certain charac-
teristics. We provide an overview of these shared characteristics in this
section. We will always assume that we have observed a set of n different
data points. For example in Figure 2.2 we observed n = 30 data points.
These observations are called the training data because we will use these training
data
observations to train, or teach, our method how to estimate f. Let xij
represent the value of the jth predictor, or input, for observation i, where
i = 1, 2, . . . , n and j = 1, 2, . . . , p. Correspondingly, let yi represent the
response variable for the ith observation. Then our training data consist of
{(x1, y1), (x2, y2), . . . , (xn, yn)} where xi = (xi1, xi2, . . . , xip)T .
Our goal is to apply a statistical learning method to the training data
in order to estimate the unknown function f. In other words, we want to
find a function ˆf such that Y ≈ˆf(X) for any observation (X, Y ). Broadly
speaking, most statistical learning methods for this task can be character-
ized as either parametric or non-parametric. We now briefly discuss these parametric
non-
parametric
two types of approaches.
Parametric Methods
Parametric methods involve a two-step model-based approach.
1. First, we make an assumption about the functional form, or shape,
of f. For example, one very simple assumption is that f is linear in
X:
f(X) = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + · · · + βpXp.
(2.4)
This is a linear model, which will be discussed extensively in Chap-
ter 3. Once we have assumed that f is linear, the problem of estimat-
ing f is greatly simplified. Instead of having to estimate an entirely
arbitrary p-dimensional function f(X), one only needs to estimate
the p + 1 coefficients β0, β1, . . . , βp.
