88
3. Linear Regression
Three: Model Fit
Two of the most common numerical measures of model fit are the RSE and
R2, the fraction of variance explained. These quantities are computed and
interpreted in the same fashion as for simple linear regression.
Recall that in simple regression, R2 is the square of the correlation of the
response and the variable. In multiple linear regression, it turns out that it
equals Cor(Y, ˆY )2, the square of the correlation between the response and
the fitted linear model; in fact one property of the fitted linear model is
that it maximizes this correlation among all possible linear models.
An R2 value close to 1 indicates that the model explains a large por-
tion of the variance in the response variable. As an example, we saw in
Table 3.6 that for the Advertising data, the model that uses all three ad-
vertising media to predict sales has an R2 of 0.8972. On the other hand,
the model that uses only TV and radio to predict sales has an R2 value
of 0.89719. In other words, there is a small increase in R2 if we include
newspaper advertising in the model that already contains TV and radio
advertising, even though we saw earlier that the p-value for newspaper ad-
vertising in Table 3.4 is not significant. It turns out that R2 will always
increase when more variables are added to the model, even if those vari-
ables are only weakly associated with the response. This is due to the fact
that adding another variable always results in a decrease in the residual
sum of squares on the training data (though not necessarily the testing
data). Thus, the R2 statistic, which is also computed on the training data,
must increase. The fact that adding newspaper advertising to the model
containing only TV and radio advertising leads to just a tiny increase in
R2 provides additional evidence that newspaper can be dropped from the
model. Essentially, newspaper provides no real improvement in the model
fit to the training samples, and its inclusion will likely lead to poor results
on independent test samples due to overfitting.
By contrast, the model containing only TV as a predictor had an R2 of
0.61 (Table 3.2). Adding radio to the model leads to a substantial improve-
ment in R2. This implies that a model that uses TV and radio expenditures
to predict sales is substantially better than one that uses only TV advertis-
ing. We could further quantify this improvement by looking at the p-value
for the radio coefficient in a model that contains only TV and radio as
predictors.
The model that contains only TV and radio as predictors has an RSE
of 1.681, and the model that also contains newspaper as a predictor has
an RSE of 1.686 (Table 3.6). In contrast, the model that contains only TV
has an RSE of 3.26 (Table 3.2). This corroborates our previous conclusion
that a model that uses TV and radio expenditures to predict sales is much
more accurate (on the training data) than one that only uses TV spending.
Furthermore, given that TV and radio expenditures are used as predictors,
there is no point in also using newspaper spending as a predictor in the
model. The observant reader may wonder how RSE can increase when
newspaper is added to the model given that RSS must decrease. In general
RSE is defined as
RSE =
9
1
n −p −1RSS,
(3.25)
