2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?
23
Years of Education
Seniority
Income
FIGURE 2.6. A rough thin-plate spline fit to the Income data from Figure 2.3.
This fit makes zero errors on the training data.
to produce an estimate for f that is as close as possible to the observed
data, subject to the fit—that is, the yellow surface in Figure 2.5—being
smooth. In this case, the non-parametric fit has produced a remarkably ac-
curate estimate of the true f shown in Figure 2.3. In order to fit a thin-plate
spline, the data analyst must select a level of smoothness. Figure 2.6 shows
the same thin-plate spline fit using a lower level of smoothness, allowing
for a rougher fit. The resulting estimate fits the observed data perfectly!
However, the spline fit shown in Figure 2.6 is far more variable than the
true function f, from Figure 2.3. This is an example of overfitting the
data, which we discussed previously. It is an undesirable situation because
the fit obtained will not yield accurate estimates of the response on new
observations that were not part of the original training data set. We dis-
cuss methods for choosing the correct amount of smoothness in Chapter 5.
Splines are discussed in Chapter 7.
As we have seen, there are advantages and disadvantages to parametric
and non-parametric methods for statistical learning. We explore both types
of methods throughout this book.
2.1.3
The Trade-Off Between Prediction Accuracy and Model
Interpretability
Of the many methods that we examine in this book, some are less flexible,
or more restrictive, in the sense that they can produce just a relatively
small range of shapes to estimate f. For example, linear regression is a
relatively inflexible approach, because it can only generate linear functions
such as the lines shown in Figure 2.1 or the plane shown in Figure 2.4.
Other methods, such as the thin plate splines shown in Figures 2.5 and 2.6,
are considerably more flexible because they can generate a much wider
range of possible shapes to estimate f.
