24
2. Statistical Learning
Flexibility
Interpretability
Low
High
Low
High
Subset Selection
Lasso
Least Squares
Generalized Additive Models
Trees
Bagging, Boosting
Support Vector Machines
Deep Learning
FIGURE 2.7.
A representation of the tradeoff between flexibility and inter-
pretability, using different statistical learning methods. In general, as the flexibility
of a method increases, its interpretability decreases.
One might reasonably ask the following question: why would we ever
choose to use a more restrictive method instead of a very flexible approach?
There are several reasons that we might prefer a more restrictive model.
If we are mainly interested in inference, then restrictive models are much
more interpretable. For instance, when inference is the goal, the linear
model may be a good choice since it will be quite easy to understand
the relationship between Y and X1, X2, . . . , Xp. In contrast, very flexible
approaches, such as the splines discussed in Chapter 7 and displayed in
Figures 2.5 and 2.6, and the boosting methods discussed in Chapter 8, can
lead to such complicated estimates of f that it is difficult to understand
how any individual predictor is associated with the response.
Figure 2.7 provides an illustration of the trade-off between flexibility and
interpretability for some of the methods that we cover in this book. Least
squares linear regression, discussed in Chapter 3, is relatively inflexible but
is quite interpretable. The lasso, discussed in Chapter 6, relies upon the lasso
linear model (2.4) but uses an alternative fitting procedure for estimating
the coefficients β0, β1, . . . , βp. The new procedure is more restrictive in es-
timating the coefficients, and sets a number of them to exactly zero. Hence
in this sense the lasso is a less flexible approach than linear regression.
It is also more interpretable than linear regression, because in the final
model the response variable will only be related to a small subset of the
predictors—namely, those with nonzero coefficient estimates. Generalized
additive models (GAMs), discussed in Chapter 7, instead extend the lin- generalized
additive
model
ear model (2.4) to allow for certain non-linear relationships. Consequently,
GAMs are more flexible than linear regression. They are also somewhat
less interpretable than linear regression, because the relationship between
each predictor and the response is now modeled using a curve. Finally,
fully non-linear methods such as bagging, boosting, support vector machines bagging
boosting
with non-linear kernels, and neural networks (deep learning), discussed in
support
vector
machine
Chapters 8, 9, and 10, are highly flexible approaches that are harder to
interpret.
