3.1 Simple Linear Regression
73
FIGURE 3.2.
Contour and three-dimensional plots of the RSS on the
Advertising data, using sales as the response and TV as the predictor. The
red dots correspond to the least squares estimates ˆβ0 and ˆβ1, given by (3.4).
The model given by (3.5) defines the population regression line, which population
regression
line
is the best linear approximation to the true relationship between X and
Y .1 The least squares regression coefficient estimates (3.4) characterize the
least squares line (3.2). The left-hand panel of Figure 3.3 displays these least squares
line
two lines in a simple simulated example. We created 100 random Xs, and
generated 100 corresponding Y s from the model
Y = 2 + 3X + ϵ,
(3.6)
where ϵ was generated from a normal distribution with mean zero. The
red line in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.3 displays the true relationship,
f(X) = 2 + 3X, while the blue line is the least squares estimate based
on the observed data. The true relationship is generally not known for
real data, but the least squares line can always be computed using the
coefficient estimates given in (3.4). In other words, in real applications,
we have access to a set of observations from which we can compute the
least squares line; however, the population regression line is unobserved.
In the right-hand panel of Figure 3.3 we have generated ten different data
sets from the model given by (3.6) and plotted the corresponding ten least
squares lines. Notice that different data sets generated from the same true
model result in slightly different least squares lines, but the unobserved
population regression line does not change.
At first glance, the difference between the population regression line and
the least squares line may seem subtle and confusing. We only have one
data set, and so what does it mean that two different lines describe the
relationship between the predictor and the response? Fundamentally, the
concept of these two lines is a natural extension of the standard statistical
approach of using information from a sample to estimate characteristics of a
large population. For example, suppose that we are interested in knowing
1The assumption of linearity is often a useful working model. However, despite what
many textbooks might tell us, we seldom believe that the true relationship is linear.
β0
β1
 2.11 
 2.15 
 2.2 
 2.3 
 2.5 
 2.5 
 3 
 3 
5
6
7
8
9
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
RSS
β1
β0
