12
1. Introduction
Name
Description
Auto
Gas mileage, horsepower, and other information for cars.
Bikeshare
Hourly usage of a bike sharing program in Washington, DC.
Boston
Housing values and other information about Boston census tracts.
BrainCancer
Survival times for patients diagnosed with brain cancer.
Caravan
Information about individuals offered caravan insurance.
Carseats
Information about car seat sales in 400 stores.
College
Demographic characteristics, tuition, and more for USA colleges.
Credit
Information about credit card debt for 400 customers.
Default
Customer default records for a credit card company.
Fund
Returns of 2,000 hedge fund managers over 50 months.
Hitters
Records and salaries for baseball players.
Khan
Gene expression measurements for four cancer types.
NCI60
Gene expression measurements for 64 cancer cell lines.
NYSE
Returns, volatility, and volume for the New York Stock Exchange.
OJ
Sales information for Citrus Hill and Minute Maid orange juice.
Portfolio
Past values of financial assets, for use in portfolio allocation.
Publication
Time to publication for 244 clinical trials.
Smarket
Daily percentage returns for S&P 500 over a 5-year period.
USArrests
Crime statistics per 100,000 residents in 50 states of USA.
Wage
Income survey data for men in central Atlantic region of USA.
Weekly
1,089 weekly stock market returns for 21 years.
TABLE 1.1. A list of data sets needed to perform the labs and exercises in this
textbook. All data sets are available in the ISLP package, with the exception of
USArrests, which is part of the base R distribution, but accessible from Python.
the lab sections may no longer correspond precisely to the results obtained
by the reader who performs the labs. As necessary, we will post updates to
the labs on the book website.
We use the
symbol to denote sections or exercises that contain more
challenging concepts. These can be easily skipped by readers who do not
wish to delve as deeply into the material, or who lack the mathematical
background.
Data Sets Used in Labs and Exercises
In this textbook, we illustrate statistical learning methods using applica-
tions from marketing, finance, biology, and other areas. The ISLP package
contains a number of data sets that are required in order to perform the
labs and exercises associated with this book. One other data set is part of
the base R distribution (the USArrests data), and we show how to access it
from Python in Section 12.5.1. Table 1.1 contains a summary of the data
sets required to perform the labs and exercises. A couple of these data sets
are also available as text files on the book website, for use in Chapter 2.
