3.1 Simple Linear Regression
71
For example, X may represent TV advertising and Y may represent sales.
Then we can regress sales onto TV by fitting the model
sales ≈β0 + β1 × TV.
In Equation 3.1, β0 and β1 are two unknown constants that represent
the intercept and slope terms in the linear model. Together, β0 and β1 are intercept
slope
known as the model coefficients or parameters.
Once we have used our
coefficient
parameter
training data to produce estimates ˆβ0 and ˆβ1 for the model coefficients, we
can predict future sales on the basis of a particular value of TV advertising
by computing
ˆy = ˆβ0 + ˆβ1x,
(3.2)
where ˆy indicates a prediction of Y on the basis of X = x. Here we use a
hat symbol, ˆ , to denote the estimated value for an unknown parameter
or coefficient, or to denote the predicted value of the response.
3.1.1
Estimating the Coefficients
In practice, β0 and β1 are unknown. So before we can use (3.1) to make
predictions, we must use data to estimate the coefficients. Let
(x1, y1), (x2, y2), . . . , (xn, yn)
represent n observation pairs, each of which consists of a measurement of
X and a measurement of Y . In the Advertising example, this data set con-
sists of the TV advertising budget and product sales in n = 200 different
markets. (Recall that the data are displayed in Figure 2.1.) Our goal is to
obtain coefficient estimates ˆβ0 and ˆβ1 such that the linear model (3.1) fits
the available data well—that is, so that yi ≈ˆβ0 + ˆβ1xi for i = 1, . . . , n. In
other words, we want to find an intercept ˆβ0 and a slope ˆβ1 such that the
resulting line is as close as possible to the n = 200 data points. There are
a number of ways of measuring closeness. However, by far the most com-
mon approach involves minimizing the least squares criterion, and we take least squares
that approach in this chapter. Alternative approaches will be considered in
Chapter 6.
Let ˆyi = ˆβ0 + ˆβ1xi be the prediction for Y based on the ith value of X.
Then ei = yi −ˆyi represents the ith residual—this is the difference between residual
the ith observed response value and the ith response value that is predicted
by our linear model. We define the residual sum of squares (RSS) as
residual sum
of squares
RSS = e2
1 + e2
2 + · · · + e2
n,
or equivalently as
RSS = (y1 −ˆβ0 −ˆβ1x1)2 +(y2 −ˆβ0 −ˆβ1x2)2 +· · ·+(yn −ˆβ0 −ˆβ1xn)2. (3.3)
The least squares approach chooses ˆβ0 and ˆβ1 to minimize the RSS. Using
some calculus, one can show that the minimizers are
ˆβ1 =
)n
i=1(xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
)n
i=1(xi −¯x)2
,
ˆβ0 = ¯y −ˆβ1¯x,
(3.4)
