28
2. Statistical Learning
best, but some other method may work better on a similar but different
data set. Hence it is an important task to decide for any given set of data
which method produces the best results. Selecting the best approach can
be one of the most challenging parts of performing statistical learning in
practice.
In this section, we discuss some of the most important concepts that
arise in selecting a statistical learning procedure for a specific data set. As
the book progresses, we will explain how the concepts presented here can
be applied in practice.
2.2.1
Measuring the Quality of Fit
In order to evaluate the performance of a statistical learning method on
a given data set, we need some way to measure how well its predictions
actually match the observed data. That is, we need to quantify the extent
to which the predicted response value for a given observation is close to
the true response value for that observation. In the regression setting, the
most commonly-used measure is the mean squared error (MSE), given by
mean
squared
error
MSE = 1
n
n
0
i=1
(yi −ˆf(xi))2,
(2.5)
where ˆf(xi) is the prediction that ˆf gives for the ith observation. The MSE
will be small if the predicted responses are very close to the true responses,
and will be large if for some of the observations, the predicted and true
responses differ substantially.
The MSE in (2.5) is computed using the training data that was used to
fit the model, and so should more accurately be referred to as the training
MSE. But in general, we do not really care how well the method works training
MSE
on the training data. Rather, we are interested in the accuracy of the pre-
dictions that we obtain when we apply our method to previously unseen
test data. Why is this what we care about? Suppose that we are interested test data
in developing an algorithm to predict a stock’s price based on previous
stock returns. We can train the method using stock returns from the past
6 months. But we don’t really care how well our method predicts last week’s
stock price. We instead care about how well it will predict tomorrow’s price
or next month’s price. On a similar note, suppose that we have clinical
measurements (e.g. weight, blood pressure, height, age, family history of
disease) for a number of patients, as well as information about whether each
patient has diabetes. We can use these patients to train a statistical learn-
ing method to predict risk of diabetes based on clinical measurements. In
practice, we want this method to accurately predict diabetes risk for future
patients based on their clinical measurements. We are not very interested
in whether or not the method accurately predicts diabetes risk for patients
used to train the model, since we already know which of those patients
have diabetes.
To state it more mathematically, suppose that we fit our statistical learn-
ing method on our training observations {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), . . . , (xn, yn)},
and we obtain the estimate ˆf. We can then compute ˆf(x1), ˆf(x2), . . . , ˆf(xn).
