3.2 Multiple Linear Regression
81
However, the approach of fitting a separate simple linear regression model
for each predictor is not entirely satisfactory. First of all, it is unclear how to
make a single prediction of sales given the three advertising media budgets,
since each of the budgets is associated with a separate regression equation.
Second, each of the three regression equations ignores the other two media
in forming estimates for the regression coefficients. We will see shortly that
if the media budgets are correlated with each other in the 200 markets
in our data set, then this can lead to very misleading estimates of the
association between each media budget and sales.
Instead of fitting a separate simple linear regression model for each pre-
dictor, a better approach is to extend the simple linear regression model
(3.5) so that it can directly accommodate multiple predictors. We can do
this by giving each predictor a separate slope coefficient in a single model.
In general, suppose that we have p distinct predictors. Then the multiple
linear regression model takes the form
Y = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + · · · + βpXp + ϵ,
(3.19)
where Xj represents the jth predictor and βj quantifies the association
between that variable and the response. We interpret βj as the average
effect on Y of a one unit increase in Xj, holding all other predictors fixed.
In the advertising example, (3.19) becomes
sales = β0 + β1 × TV + β2 × radio + β3 × newspaper + ϵ.
(3.20)
3.2.1
Estimating the Regression Coefficients
As was the case in the simple linear regression setting, the regression coef-
ficients β0, β1, . . . , βp in (3.19) are unknown, and must be estimated. Given
estimates ˆβ0, ˆβ1, . . . , ˆβp, we can make predictions using the formula
ˆy = ˆβ0 + ˆβ1x1 + ˆβ2x2 + · · · + ˆβpxp.
(3.21)
The parameters are estimated using the same least squares approach that
we saw in the context of simple linear regression. We choose β0, β1, . . . , βp
to minimize the sum of squared residuals
RSS
=
n
0
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
=
n
0
i=1
(yi −ˆβ0 −ˆβ1xi1 −ˆβ2xi2 −· · · −ˆβpxip)2.
(3.22)
The values ˆβ0, ˆβ1, . . . , ˆβp that minimize (3.22) are the multiple least squares
regression coefficient estimates. Unlike the simple linear regression esti-
mates given in (3.4), the multiple regression coefficient estimates have
somewhat complicated forms that are most easily represented using ma-
trix algebra. For this reason, we do not provide them here. Any statistical
software package can be used to compute these coefficient estimates, and
later in this chapter we will show how this can be done in R. Figure 3.4
