1. Introduction
7
In teaching these topics over the years, we have discovered that they are
of interest to master’s and PhD students in fields as disparate as business
administration, biology, and computer science, as well as to quantitatively-
oriented upper-division undergraduates. It is important for this diverse
group to be able to understand the models, intuitions, and strengths and
weaknesses of the various approaches. But for this audience, many of the
technical details behind statistical learning methods, such as optimiza-
tion algorithms and theoretical properties, are not of primary interest.
We believe that these students do not need a deep understanding of these
aspects in order to become informed users of the various methodologies, and
in order to contribute to their chosen fields through the use of statistical
learning tools.
ISL is based on the following four premises.
1. Many statistical learning methods are relevant and useful in a wide
range of academic and non-academic disciplines, beyond just the sta-
tistical sciences. We believe that many contemporary statistical learn-
ing procedures should, and will, become as widely available and used
as is currently the case for classical methods such as linear regres-
sion. As a result, rather than attempting to consider every possible
approach (an impossible task), we have concentrated on presenting
the methods that we believe are most widely applicable.
2. Statistical learning should not be viewed as a series of black boxes. No
single approach will perform well in all possible applications. With-
out understanding all of the cogs inside the box, or the interaction
between those cogs, it is impossible to select the best box. Hence, we
have attempted to carefully describe the model, intuition, assump-
tions, and trade-offs behind each of the methods that we consider.
3. While it is important to know what job is performed by each cog, it is
not necessary to have the skills to construct the machine inside the
box! Thus, we have minimized discussion of technical details related
to fitting procedures and theoretical properties. We assume that the
reader is comfortable with basic mathematical concepts, but we do
not assume a graduate degree in the mathematical sciences. For in-
stance, we have almost completely avoided the use of matrix algebra,
and it is possible to understand the entire book without a detailed
knowledge of matrices and vectors.
4. We presume that the reader is interested in applying statistical learn-
ing methods to real-world problems. In order to facilitate this, as well
as to motivate the techniques discussed, we have devoted a section
within each chapter to computer labs. In each lab, we walk the reader
through a realistic application of the methods considered in that chap-
ter. When we have taught this material in our courses, we have al-
located roughly one-third of classroom time to working through the
labs, and we have found them to be extremely useful. Many of the
less computationally-oriented students who were initially intimidated
by the labs got the hang of things over the course of the quarter or
semester. This book originally appeared (2013, second edition 2021)
