30
2. Statistical Learning
the true f given by the black curve. The orange, blue and green curves illus-
trate three possible estimates for f obtained using methods with increasing
levels of flexibility. The orange line is the linear regression fit, which is rela-
tively inflexible. The blue and green curves were produced using smoothing
splines, discussed in Chapter 7, with different levels of smoothness. It is smoothing
spline
clear that as the level of flexibility increases, the curves fit the observed
data more closely. The green curve is the most flexible and matches the
data very well; however, we observe that it fits the true f (shown in black)
poorly because it is too wiggly. By adjusting the level of flexibility of the
smoothing spline fit, we can produce many different fits to this data.
We now move on to the right-hand panel of Figure 2.9. The grey curve
displays the average training MSE as a function of flexibility, or more
formally the degrees of freedom, for a number of smoothing splines. The degrees of
freedom
degrees of freedom is a quantity that summarizes the flexibility of a curve;
it is discussed more fully in Chapter 7. The orange, blue and green squares
indicate the MSEs associated with the corresponding curves in the left-
hand panel. A more restricted and hence smoother curve has fewer degrees
of freedom than a wiggly curve—note that in Figure 2.9, linear regression
is at the most restrictive end, with two degrees of freedom. The training
MSE declines monotonically as flexibility increases. In this example the
true f is non-linear, and so the orange linear fit is not flexible enough to
estimate f well. The green curve has the lowest training MSE of all three
methods, since it corresponds to the most flexible of the three curves fit in
the left-hand panel.
In this example, we know the true function f, and so we can also com-
pute the test MSE over a very large test set, as a function of flexibility. (Of
course, in general f is unknown, so this will not be possible.) The test MSE
is displayed using the red curve in the right-hand panel of Figure 2.9. As
with the training MSE, the test MSE initially declines as the level of flex-
ibility increases. However, at some point the test MSE levels off and then
starts to increase again. Consequently, the orange and green curves both
have high test MSE. The blue curve minimizes the test MSE, which should
not be surprising given that visually it appears to estimate f the best in the
left-hand panel of Figure 2.9. The horizontal dashed line indicates Var(ϵ),
the irreducible error in (2.3), which corresponds to the lowest achievable
test MSE among all possible methods. Hence, the smoothing spline repre-
sented by the blue curve is close to optimal.
In the right-hand panel of Figure 2.9, as the flexibility of the statistical
learning method increases, we observe a monotone decrease in the training
MSE and a U-shape in the test MSE. This is a fundamental property of
statistical learning that holds regardless of the particular data set at hand
and regardless of the statistical method being used. As model flexibility
increases, the training MSE will decrease, but the test MSE may not. When
a given method yields a small training MSE but a large test MSE, we are
said to be overfitting the data. This happens because our statistical learning
procedure is working too hard to find patterns in the training data, and
may be picking up some patterns that are just caused by random chance
rather than by true properties of the unknown function f. When we overfit
the training data, the test MSE will be very large because the supposed
