3.1 Simple Linear Regression
75
estimated from a separate data set, is pretty close to the true population
regression line.
We continue the analogy with the estimation of the population mean
µ of a random variable Y . A natural question is as follows: how accurate
is the sample mean ˆµ as an estimate of µ? We have established that the
average of ˆµ’s over many data sets will be very close to µ, but that a
single estimate ˆµ may be a substantial underestimate or overestimate of µ.
How far off will that single estimate of ˆµ be? In general, we answer this
question by computing the standard error of ˆµ, written as SE(ˆµ). We have standard
error
the well-known formula
Var(ˆµ) = SE(ˆµ)2 = σ2
n ,
(3.7)
where σ is the standard deviation of each of the realizations yi of Y .2
Roughly speaking, the standard error tells us the average amount that this
estimate ˆµ differs from the actual value of µ. Equation 3.7 also tells us how
this deviation shrinks with n—the more observations we have, the smaller
the standard error of ˆµ. In a similar vein, we can wonder how close ˆβ0
and ˆβ1 are to the true values β0 and β1. To compute the standard errors
associated with ˆβ0 and ˆβ1, we use the following formulas:
SE(ˆβ0)
2 = σ2
3 1
n +
¯x2
)n
i=1(xi −¯x)2
4
,
SE(ˆβ1)
2 =
σ2
)n
i=1(xi −¯x)2 , (3.8)
where σ2 = Var(ϵ). For these formulas to be strictly valid, we need to
assume that the errors ϵi for each observation have common variance σ2 and
are uncorrelated. This is clearly not true in Figure 3.1, but the formula still
turns out to be a good approximation. Notice in the formula that SE(ˆβ1) is
smaller when the xi are more spread out; intuitively we have more leverage
to estimate a slope when this is the case. We also see that SE(ˆβ0) would be
the same as SE(ˆµ) if ¯x were zero (in which case ˆβ0 would be equal to ¯y). In
general, σ2 is not known, but can be estimated from the data. This estimate
of σ is known as the residual standard error, and is given by the formula residual
standard
error
RSE =
5
RSS/(n −2). Strictly speaking, when σ2 is estimated from the
data we should write 6
SE(ˆβ1) to indicate that an estimate has been made,
but for simplicity of notation we will drop this extra “hat”.
Standard errors can be used to compute confidence intervals. A 95 % confidence
interval
confidence interval is defined as a range of values such that with 95 %
probability, the range will contain the true unknown value of the param-
eter. The range is defined in terms of lower and upper limits computed
from the sample of data. A 95% confidence interval has the following prop-
erty: if we take repeated samples and construct the confidence interval for
each sample, 95% of the intervals will contain the true unknown value of
the parameter. For linear regression, the 95 % confidence interval for β1
approximately takes the form
ˆβ1 ± 2 · SE(ˆβ1).
(3.9)
2This formula holds provided that the n observations are uncorrelated.
