22
2. Statistical Learning
Years of Education
Seniority
Income
FIGURE 2.5. A smooth thin-plate spline fit to the Income data from Figure 2.3
is shown in yellow; the observations are displayed in red. Splines are discussed in
Chapter 7.
Since we have assumed a linear relationship between the response and the
two predictors, the entire fitting problem reduces to estimating β0, β1, and
β2, which we do using least squares linear regression. Comparing Figure 2.3
to Figure 2.4, we can see that the linear fit given in Figure 2.4 is not quite
right: the true f has some curvature that is not captured in the linear fit.
However, the linear fit still appears to do a reasonable job of capturing the
positive relationship between years of education and income, as well as the
slightly less positive relationship between seniority and income. It may be
that with such a small number of observations, this is the best we can do.
Non-Parametric Methods
Non-parametric methods do not make explicit assumptions about the func-
tional form of f. Instead they seek an estimate of f that gets as close to the
data points as possible without being too rough or wiggly. Such approaches
can have a major advantage over parametric approaches: by avoiding the
assumption of a particular functional form for f, they have the potential
to accurately fit a wider range of possible shapes for f. Any parametric
approach brings with it the possibility that the functional form used to
estimate f is very different from the true f, in which case the resulting
model will not fit the data well. In contrast, non-parametric approaches
completely avoid this danger, since essentially no assumption about the
form of f is made. But non-parametric approaches do suffer from a major
disadvantage: since they do not reduce the problem of estimating f to a
small number of parameters, a very large number of observations (far more
than is typically needed for a parametric approach) is required in order to
obtain an accurate estimate for f.
An example of a non-parametric approach to fitting the Income data is
shown in Figure 2.5. A thin-plate spline is used to estimate f. This ap- thin-plate
spline
proach does not impose any pre-specified model on f. It instead attempts
