2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy
35
our estimate ˆf to the training observations:
1
n
n
0
i=1
I(yi̸ = ˆyi).
(2.8)
Here ˆyi is the predicted class label for the ith observation using ˆf. And
I(yi̸ = ˆyi) is an indicator variable that equals 1 if yi̸ = ˆyi and zero if yi = ˆyi. indicator
variable
If I(yi̸ = ˆyi) = 0 then the ith observation was classified correctly by our
classification method; otherwise it was misclassified. Hence Equation 2.8
computes the fraction of incorrect classifications.
Equation 2.8 is referred to as the training error rate because it is com- training
error
puted based on the data that was used to train our classifier. As in the
regression setting, we are most interested in the error rates that result from
applying our classifier to test observations that were not used in training.
The test error rate associated with a set of test observations of the form test error
(x0, y0) is given by
Ave (I(y0̸ = ˆy0)) ,
(2.9)
where ˆy0 is the predicted class label that results from applying the classifier
to the test observation with predictor x0. A good classifier is one for which
the test error (2.9) is smallest.
The Bayes Classifier
It is possible to show (though the proof is outside of the scope of this
book) that the test error rate given in (2.9) is minimized, on average, by a
very simple classifier that assigns each observation to the most likely class,
given its predictor values. In other words, we should simply assign a test
observation with predictor vector x0 to the class j for which
Pr(Y = j|X = x0)
(2.10)
is largest. Note that (2.10) is a conditional probability: it is the probability conditional
probability
that Y = j, given the observed predictor vector x0. This very simple clas-
sifier is called the Bayes classifier. In a two-class problem where there are Bayes
classifier
only two possible response values, say class 1 or class 2, the Bayes classifier
corresponds to predicting class one if Pr(Y = 1|X = x0) > 0.5, and class
two otherwise.
Figure 2.13 provides an example using a simulated data set in a two-
dimensional space consisting of predictors X1 and X2. The orange and
blue circles correspond to training observations that belong to two different
classes. For each value of X1 and X2, there is a different probability of the
response being orange or blue. Since this is simulated data, we know how
the data were generated and we can calculate the conditional probabilities
for each value of X1 and X2. The orange shaded region reflects the set of
points for which Pr(Y = orange|X) is greater than 50 %, while the blue
shaded region indicates the set of points for which the probability is below
50 %. The purple dashed line represents the points where the probability
is exactly 50 %. This is called the Bayes decision boundary. The Bayes Bayes
decision
boundary
classifier’s prediction is determined by the Bayes decision boundary; an
observation that falls on the orange side of the boundary will be assigned
