2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?
19
• Which predictors are associated with the response? It is often the case
that only a small fraction of the available predictors are substantially
associated with Y . Identifying the few important predictors among a
large set of possible variables can be extremely useful, depending on
the application.
• What is the relationship between the response and each predictor?
Some predictors may have a positive relationship with Y , in the sense
that larger values of the predictor are associated with larger values of
Y . Other predictors may have the opposite relationship. Depending
on the complexity of f, the relationship between the response and a
given predictor may also depend on the values of the other predictors.
• Can the relationship between Y and each predictor be adequately sum-
marized using a linear equation, or is the relationship more compli-
cated? Historically, most methods for estimating f have taken a linear
form. In some situations, such an assumption is reasonable or even de-
sirable. But often the true relationship is more complicated, in which
case a linear model may not provide an accurate representation of
the relationship between the input and output variables.
In this book, we will see a number of examples that fall into the prediction
setting, the inference setting, or a combination of the two.
For instance, consider a company that is interested in conducting a
direct-marketing campaign. The goal is to identify individuals who are
likely to respond positively to a mailing, based on observations of demo-
graphic variables measured on each individual. In this case, the demo-
graphic variables serve as predictors, and response to the marketing cam-
paign (either positive or negative) serves as the outcome. The company is
not interested in obtaining a deep understanding of the relationships be-
tween each individual predictor and the response; instead, the company
simply wants to accurately predict the response using the predictors. This
is an example of modeling for prediction.
In contrast, consider the Advertising data illustrated in Figure 2.1. One
may be interested in answering questions such as:
– Which media are associated with sales?
– Which media generate the biggest boost in sales? or
– How large of an increase in sales is associated with a given increase
in TV advertising?
This situation falls into the inference paradigm. Another example involves
modeling the brand of a product that a customer might purchase based on
variables such as price, store location, discount levels, competition price,
and so forth. In this situation one might really be most interested in the
association between each variable and the probability of purchase. For in-
stance, to what extent is the product’s price associated with sales? This is
an example of modeling for inference.
Finally, some modeling could be conducted both for prediction and in-
ference. For example, in a real estate setting, one may seek to relate values
