6
1. Introduction
developed by statisticians and computer scientists to an essential toolkit
for a much broader community.
This Book
The Elements of Statistical Learning (ESL) by Hastie, Tibshirani, and
Friedman was first published in 2001. Since that time, it has become an
important reference on the fundamentals of statistical machine learning.
Its success derives from its comprehensive and detailed treatment of many
important topics in statistical learning, as well as the fact that (relative to
many upper-level statistics textbooks) it is accessible to a wide audience.
However, the greatest factor behind the success of ESL has been its topical
nature. At the time of its publication, interest in the field of statistical
learning was starting to explode. ESL provided one of the first accessible
and comprehensive introductions to the topic.
Since ESL was first published, the field of statistical learning has con-
tinued to flourish. The field’s expansion has taken two forms. The most
obvious growth has involved the development of new and improved statis-
tical learning approaches aimed at answering a range of scientific questions
across a number of fields. However, the field of statistical learning has
also expanded its audience. In the 1990s, increases in computational power
generated a surge of interest in the field from non-statisticians who were
eager to use cutting-edge statistical tools to analyze their data. Unfortu-
nately, the highly technical nature of these approaches meant that the user
community remained primarily restricted to experts in statistics, computer
science, and related fields with the training (and time) to understand and
implement them.
In recent years, new and improved software packages have significantly
eased the implementation burden for many statistical learning methods.
At the same time, there has been growing recognition across a number of
fields, from business to health care to genetics to the social sciences and
beyond, that statistical learning is a powerful tool with important practical
applications. As a result, the field has moved from one of primarily academic
interest to a mainstream discipline, with an enormous potential audience.
This trend will surely continue with the increasing availability of enormous
quantities of data and the software to analyze it.
The purpose of An Introduction to Statistical Learning (ISL) is to facili-
tate the transition of statistical learning from an academic to a mainstream
field. ISL is not intended to replace ESL, which is a far more comprehen-
sive text both in terms of the number of approaches considered and the
depth to which they are explored. We consider ESL to be an important
companion for professionals (with graduate degrees in statistics, machine
learning, or related fields) who need to understand the technical details
behind statistical learning approaches. However, the community of users of
statistical learning techniques has expanded to include individuals with a
wider range of interests and backgrounds. Therefore, there is a place for a
less technical and more accessible version of ESL.
