8
1. Introduction
with computer labs written in the R language. Since then, there has
been increasing demand for Python implementations of the impor-
tant techniques in statistical learning. Consequently, this version has
labs in Python. There are a rapidly growing number of Python pack-
ages available, and by examination of the imports at the beginning of
each lab, readers will see that we have carefully selected and used the
most appropriate. We have also supplied some additional code and
functionality in our package ISLP. However, the labs in ISL are self-
contained, and can be skipped if the reader wishes to use a different
software package or does not wish to apply the methods discussed to
real-world problems.
Who Should Read This Book?
This book is intended for anyone who is interested in using modern statis-
tical methods for modeling and prediction from data. This group includes
scientists, engineers, data analysts, data scientists, and quants, but also less
technical individuals with degrees in non-quantitative fields such as the so-
cial sciences or business. We expect that the reader will have had at least
one elementary course in statistics. Background in linear regression is also
useful, though not required, since we review the key concepts behind linear
regression in Chapter 3. The mathematical level of this book is modest,
and a detailed knowledge of matrix operations is not required. This book
provides an introduction to Python. Previous exposure to a programming
language, such as MATLAB or R, is useful but not required.
The first edition of this textbook has been used to teach master’s and
PhD students in business, economics, computer science, biology, earth sci-
ences, psychology, and many other areas of the physical and social sciences.
It has also been used to teach advanced undergraduates who have already
taken a course on linear regression. In the context of a more mathemat-
ically rigorous course in which ESL serves as the primary textbook, ISL
could be used as a supplementary text for teaching computational aspects
of the various approaches.
Notation and Simple Matrix Algebra
Choosing notation for a textbook is always a difficult task. For the most
part we adopt the same notational conventions as ESL.
We will use n to represent the number of distinct data points, or observa-
tions, in our sample. We will let p denote the number of variables that are
available for use in making predictions. For example, the Wage data set con-
sists of 11 variables for 3,000 people, so we have n = 3,000 observations and
p = 11 variables (such as year, age, race, and more). Note that throughout
this book, we indicate variable names using colored font: Variable Name.
In some examples, p might be quite large, such as on the order of thou-
sands or even millions; this situation arises quite often, for example, in the
analysis of modern biological data or web-based advertising data.
