3.1 Simple Linear Regression
79
clear what constitutes a good RSE. The R2 statistic provides an alternative
measure of fit. It takes the form of a proportion—the proportion of variance
explained—and so it always takes on a value between 0 and 1, and is
independent of the scale of Y .
To calculate R2, we use the formula
R2 = TSS −RSS
TSS
= 1 −RSS
TSS
(3.17)
where TSS = )(yi −¯y)2 is the total sum of squares, and RSS is defined total sum of
squares
in (3.16). TSS measures the total variance in the response Y , and can be
thought of as the amount of variability inherent in the response before the
regression is performed. In contrast, RSS measures the amount of variability
that is left unexplained after performing the regression. Hence, TSS −RSS
measures the amount of variability in the response that is explained (or
removed) by performing the regression, and R2 measures the proportion of
variability in Y that can be explained using X. An R2 statistic that is close
to 1 indicates that a large proportion of the variability in the response is
explained by the regression. A number near 0 indicates that the regression
does not explain much of the variability in the response; this might occur
because the linear model is wrong, or the error variance σ2 is high, or both.
In Table 3.2, the R2 was 0.61, and so just under two-thirds of the variability
in sales is explained by a linear regression on TV.
The R2 statistic (3.17) has an interpretational advantage over the RSE
(3.15), since unlike the RSE, it always lies between 0 and 1. However, it can
still be challenging to determine what is a good R2 value, and in general,
this will depend on the application. For instance, in certain problems in
physics, we may know that the data truly comes from a linear model with
a small residual error. In this case, we would expect to see an R2 value that
is extremely close to 1, and a substantially smaller R2 value might indicate a
serious problem with the experiment in which the data were generated. On
the other hand, in typical applications in biology, psychology, marketing,
and other domains, the linear model (3.5) is at best an extremely rough
approximation to the data, and residual errors due to other unmeasured
factors are often very large. In this setting, we would expect only a very
small proportion of the variance in the response to be explained by the
predictor, and an R2 value well below 0.1 might be more realistic!
The R2 statistic is a measure of the linear relationship between X and
Y . Recall that correlation, defined as
correlation
Cor(X, Y ) =
)n
i=1(xi −x)(yi −y)
5)n
i=1(xi −x)25)n
i=1(yi −y)2 ,
(3.18)
is also a measure of the linear relationship between X and Y .5 This sug-
gests that we might be able to use r = Cor(X, Y ) instead of R2 in order to
assess the fit of the linear model. In fact, it can be shown that in the simple
5We note that in fact, the right-hand side of (3.18) is the sample correlation; thus,
it would be more correct to write
!
Cor(X, Y ); however, we omit the “hat” for ease of
notation.
