40
2. Statistical Learning
2.3
Lab: Introduction to Python
2.3.1
Getting Started
To run the labs in this book, you will need two things:
1. An installation of Python3, which is the specific version of Python used
in the labs.
2. Access to Jupyter, a very popular Python interface that runs code
through a file called a notebook.
notebook
You can download and install Python3 by following the instructions avail-
able at anaconda.com.
There are a number of ways to get access to Jupyter. Here are just a few:
1. Using Google’s Colaboratory service: colab.research.google.com/.
2. Using JupyterHub, available at jupyter.org/hub.
3. Using your own jupyter installation. Installation instructions are
available at jupyter.org/install.
Please see the Python resources page on the book website statlearning.com
for up-to-date information about getting Python and Jupyter working on
your computer.
You will need to install the ISLP package, which provides access to the
datasets and custom-built functions that we provide. Inside a macOS or
Linux terminal type pip install ISLP; this also installs most other pack-
ages needed in the labs. The Python resources page has a link to the ISLP
documentation website.
To run this lab, download the file Ch2-statlearn-lab.ipynb from the
Python resources page. Now run the following code at the command line:
jupyter lab Ch2-statlearn-lab.ipynb.
If you’re using Windows, you can use the start menu to access anaconda,
and follow the links. For example, to install ISLP and run this lab, you can
run the same code above in an anaconda shell.
2.3.2
Basic Commands
In this lab, we will introduce some simple Python commands. For more
resources about Python in general, readers may want to consult the tutorial
at docs.python.org/3/tutorial/.
Like most programming languages, Python uses functions to perform op- function
erations. To run a function called fun, we type fun(input1,input2), where
the inputs (or arguments) input1 and input2 tell Python how to run the
function. A function can have any number of inputs. For example, the argument
print() function outputs a text representation of all of its arguments to print()
the console.
In [1]: print('fit a model with', 11, 'variables')
