1. Introduction
11
Organization of This Book
Chapter 2 introduces the basic terminology and concepts behind statisti-
cal learning. This chapter also presents the K-nearest neighbor classifier, a
very simple method that works surprisingly well on many problems. Chap-
ters 3 and 4 cover classical linear methods for regression and classification.
In particular, Chapter 3 reviews linear regression, the fundamental start-
ing point for all regression methods. In Chapter 4 we discuss two of the
most important classical classification methods, logistic regression and lin-
ear discriminant analysis.
A central problem in all statistical learning situations involves choosing
the best method for a given application. Hence, in Chapter 5 we intro-
duce cross-validation and the bootstrap, which can be used to estimate the
accuracy of a number of different methods in order to choose the best one.
Much of the recent research in statistical learning has concentrated on
non-linear methods. However, linear methods often have advantages over
their non-linear competitors in terms of interpretability and sometimes also
accuracy. Hence, in Chapter 6 we consider a host of linear methods, both
classical and more modern, which offer potential improvements over stan-
dard linear regression. These include stepwise selection, ridge regression,
principal components regression, and the lasso.
The remaining chapters move into the world of non-linear statistical
learning. We first introduce in Chapter 7 a number of non-linear meth-
ods that work well for problems with a single input variable. We then
show how these methods can be used to fit non-linear additive models for
which there is more than one input. In Chapter 8, we investigate tree-based
methods, including bagging, boosting, and random forests. Support vector
machines, a set of approaches for performing both linear and non-linear
classification, are discussed in Chapter 9. We cover deep learning, an ap-
proach for non-linear regression and classification that has received a lot
of attention in recent years, in Chapter 10. Chapter 11 explores survival
analysis, a regression approach that is specialized to the setting in which
the output variable is censored, i.e. not fully observed.
In Chapter 12, we consider the unsupervised setting in which we have
input variables but no output variable. In particular, we present princi-
pal components analysis, K-means clustering, and hierarchical clustering.
Finally, in Chapter 13 we cover the very important topic of multiple hy-
pothesis testing.
At the end of each chapter, we present one or more Python lab sections
in which we systematically work through applications of the various meth-
ods discussed in that chapter. These labs demonstrate the strengths and
weaknesses of the various approaches, and also provide a useful reference
for the syntax required to implement the various methods. The reader may
choose to work through the labs at their own pace, or the labs may be the
focus of group sessions as part of a classroom environment. Within each
Python lab, we present the results that we obtained when we performed the
lab at the time of writing this book. However, new versions of Python are
continuously released, and over time, the packages called in the labs will
be updated. Therefore, in the future, it is possible that the results shown in
