152
4. Classification
True default status
No
Yes
Total
Predicted
No
9644
252
9896
default status
Yes
23
81
104
Total
9667
333
10000
TABLE 4.4.
A confusion matrix compares the LDA predictions to the true
default statuses for the 10,000 training observations in the Default data set.
Elements on the diagonal of the matrix represent individuals whose default statuses
were correctly predicted, while off-diagonal elements represent individuals that
were misclassified. LDA made incorrect predictions for 23 individuals who did
not default and for 252 individuals who did default.
through a linear combination of its elements. As previously discussed, this
is the reason for the word linear in LDA.
In the right-hand panel of Figure 4.6, 20 observations drawn from each of
the three classes are displayed, and the resulting LDA decision boundaries
are shown as solid black lines. Overall, the LDA decision boundaries are
pretty close to the Bayes decision boundaries, shown again as dashed lines.
The test error rates for the Bayes and LDA classifiers are 0.0746 and 0.0770,
respectively. This indicates that LDA is performing well on this data.
We can perform LDA on the Default data in order to predict whether
or not an individual will default on the basis of credit card balance and
student status.4 The LDA model fit to the 10,000 training samples results
in a training error rate of 2.75 %. This sounds like a low error rate, but two
caveats must be noted.
• First of all, training error rates will usually be lower than test error
rates, which are the real quantity of interest. In other words, we
might expect this classifier to perform worse if we use it to predict
whether or not a new set of individuals will default. The reason is
that we specifically adjust the parameters of our model to do well on
the training data. The higher the ratio of parameters p to number
of samples n, the more we expect this overfitting to play a role. For overfitting
these data we don’t expect this to be a problem, since p = 2 and
n = 10, 000.
• Second, since only 3.33 % of the individuals in the training sample
defaulted, a simple but useless classifier that always predicts that
an individual will not default, regardless of his or her credit card
balance and student status, will result in an error rate of 3.33 %. In
other words, the trivial null classifier will achieve an error rate that null
is only a bit higher than the LDA training set error rate.
In practice, a binary classifier such as this one can make two types of
errors: it can incorrectly assign an individual who defaults to the no default
category, or it can incorrectly assign an individual who does not default to
4The careful reader will notice that student status is qualitative — thus, the normality
assumption made by LDA is clearly violated in this example! However, LDA is often
remarkably robust to model violations, as this example shows. Naive Bayes, discussed in
Section 4.4.4, provides an alternative to LDA that does not assume normally distributed
predictors.
