158
4. Classification
4.4.4
Naive Bayes
In previous sections, we used Bayes’ theorem (4.15) to develop the LDA
and QDA classifiers. Here, we use Bayes’ theorem to motivate the popular
naive Bayes classifier.
naive Bayes
Recall that Bayes’ theorem (4.15) provides an expression for the pos-
terior probability pk(x) = Pr(Y = k|X = x) in terms of π1, . . . , πK and
f1(x), . . . , fK(x). To use (4.15) in practice, we need estimates for π1, . . . , πK
and f1(x), . . . , fK(x). As we saw in previous sections, estimating the prior
probabilities π1, . . . , πK is typically straightforward: for instance, we can
estimate ˆπk as the proportion of training observations belonging to the kth
class, for k = 1, . . . , K.
However, estimating f1(x), . . . , fK(x) is more subtle. Recall that fk(x)
is the p-dimensional density function for an observation in the kth class,
for k = 1, . . . , K. In general, estimating a p-dimensional density function is
challenging. In LDA, we make a very strong assumption that greatly sim-
plifies the task: we assume that fk is the density function for a multivariate
normal random variable with class-specific mean µk, and shared covariance
matrix Σ. By contrast, in QDA, we assume that fk is the density function
for a multivariate normal random variable with class-specific mean µk, and
class-specific covariance matrix Σk. By making these very strong assump-
tions, we are able to replace the very challenging problem of estimating K
p-dimensional density functions with the much simpler problem of estimat-
ing K p-dimensional mean vectors and one (in the case of LDA) or K (in
the case of QDA) (p × p)-dimensional covariance matrices.
The naive Bayes classifier takes a different tack for estimating f1(x), . . . ,
fK(x). Instead of assuming that these functions belong to a particular
family of distributions (e.g. multivariate normal), we instead make a single
assumption:
Within the kth class, the p predictors are independent.
Stated mathematically, this assumption means that for k = 1, . . . , K,
fk(x) = fk1(x1) × fk2(x2) × · · · × fkp(xp),
(4.29)
where fkj is the density function of the jth predictor among observations
in the kth class.
Why is this assumption so powerful? Essentially, estimating a p-dimen-
sional density function is challenging because we must consider not only
the marginal distribution of each predictor — that is, the distribution of marginal
distribution
each predictor on its own — but also the joint distribution of the predictors
joint
distribution
— that is, the association between the different predictors. In the case of
a multivariate normal distribution, the association between the different
predictors is summarized by the off-diagonal elements of the covariance
matrix. However, in general, this association can be very hard to charac-
terize, and exceedingly challenging to estimate. But by assuming that the
p covariates are independent within each class, we completely eliminate the
need to worry about the association between the p predictors, because we
have simply assumed that there is no association between the predictors!
Do we really believe the naive Bayes assumption that the p covariates
are independent within each class? In most settings, we do not. But even
though this modeling assumption is made for convenience, it often leads to
