3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model
97
should also include the main effects, even if the p-values associated with
their coefficients are not significant. In other words, if the interaction be-
tween X1 and X2 seems important, then we should include both X1 and
X2 in the model even if their coefficient estimates have large p-values. The
rationale for this principle is that if X1 × X2 is related to the response,
then whether or not the coefficients of X1 or X2 are exactly zero is of lit-
tle interest. Also X1 × X2 is typically correlated with X1 and X2, and so
leaving them out tends to alter the meaning of the interaction.
In the previous example, we considered an interaction between TV and
radio, both of which are quantitative variables. However, the concept of
interactions applies just as well to qualitative variables, or to a combination
of quantitative and qualitative variables. In fact, an interaction between
a qualitative variable and a quantitative variable has a particularly nice
interpretation. Consider the Credit data set from Section 3.3.1, and suppose
that we wish to predict balance using the income (quantitative) and student
(qualitative) variables. In the absence of an interaction term, the model
takes the form
balancei
≈
β0 + β1 × incomei +
=
β2
if ith person is a student
0
if ith person is not a student
=
β1 × incomei +
=
β0 + β2
if ith person is a student
β0
if ith person is not a student.
(3.34)
Notice that this amounts to fitting two parallel lines to the data, one for
students and one for non-students. The lines for students and non-students
have different intercepts, β0 + β2 versus β0, but the same slope, β1. This
is illustrated in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.7. The fact that the lines
are parallel means that the average effect on balance of a one-unit increase
in income does not depend on whether or not the individual is a student.
This represents a potentially serious limitation of the model, since in fact a
change in income may have a very different effect on the credit card balance
of a student versus a non-student.
This limitation can be addressed by adding an interaction variable, cre-
ated by multiplying income with the dummy variable for student. Our
model now becomes
balancei
≈
β0 + β1 × incomei +
=
β2 + β3 × incomei
if student
0
if not student
=
=
(β0 + β2) + (β1 + β3) × incomei
if student
β0 + β1 × incomei
if not student.
(3.35)
Once again, we have two different regression lines for the students and
the non-students. But now those regression lines have different intercepts,
β0+β2 versus β0, as well as different slopes, β1+β3 versus β1. This allows for
the possibility that changes in income may affect the credit card balances
of students and non-students differently. The right-hand panel of Figure 3.7
