4.3 Logistic Regression
143
Coefficient
Std. error
z-statistic
p-value
Intercept
−10.8690
0.4923
−22.08
<0.0001
balance
0.0057
0.0002
24.74
<0.0001
income
0.0030
0.0082
0.37
0.7115
student[Yes]
−0.6468
0.2362
−2.74
0.0062
TABLE 4.3. For the Default data, estimated coefficients of the logistic regression
model that predicts the probability of default using balance, income, and student
status. Student status is encoded as a dummy variable student[Yes], with a value
of 1 for a student and a value of 0 for a non-student. In fitting this model, income
was measured in thousands of dollars.
Just as in Section 4.3.2, we use the maximum likelihood method to estimate
β0, β1, . . . , βp.
Table 4.3 shows the coefficient estimates for a logistic regression model
that uses balance, income (in thousands of dollars), and student status to
predict probability of default. There is a surprising result here. The p-
values associated with balance and the dummy variable for student status
are very small, indicating that each of these variables is associated with
the probability of default. However, the coefficient for the dummy variable
is negative, indicating that students are less likely to default than non-
students. In contrast, the coefficient for the dummy variable is positive in
Table 4.2. How is it possible for student status to be associated with an
increase in probability of default in Table 4.2 and a decrease in probability
of default in Table 4.3? The left-hand panel of Figure 4.3 provides a graph-
ical illustration of this apparent paradox. The orange and blue solid lines
show the average default rates for students and non-students, respectively,
as a function of credit card balance. The negative coefficient for student in
the multiple logistic regression indicates that for a fixed value of balance
and income, a student is less likely to default than a non-student. Indeed,
we observe from the left-hand panel of Figure 4.3 that the student default
rate is at or below that of the non-student default rate for every value of
balance. But the horizontal broken lines near the base of the plot, which
show the default rates for students and non-students averaged over all val-
ues of balance and income, suggest the opposite effect: the overall student
default rate is higher than the non-student default rate. Consequently, there
is a positive coefficient for student in the single variable logistic regression
output shown in Table 4.2.
The right-hand panel of Figure 4.3 provides an explanation for this dis-
crepancy. The variables student and balance are correlated. Students tend
to hold higher levels of debt, which is in turn associated with higher prob-
ability of default. In other words, students are more likely to have large
credit card balances, which, as we know from the left-hand panel of Fig-
ure 4.3, tend to be associated with high default rates. Thus, even though
an individual student with a given credit card balance will tend to have a
lower probability of default than a non-student with the same credit card
balance, the fact that students on the whole tend to have higher credit card
balances means that overall, students tend to default at a higher rate than
non-students. This is an important distinction for a credit card company
that is trying to determine to whom they should offer credit. A student is
riskier than a non-student if no information about the student’s credit card
