130
3. Linear Regression
ii. Which predictors appear to have a statistically significant
relationship to the response?
iii. What does the coefficient for the year variable suggest?
(d) Produce some of diagnostic plots of the linear regression fit as
described in the lab. Comment on any problems you see with the
fit. Do the residual plots suggest any unusually large outliers?
Does the leverage plot identify any observations with unusually
high leverage?
(e) Fit some models with interactions as described in the lab. Do
any interactions appear to be statistically significant?
(f) Try a few different transformations of the variables, such as
log(X),
√
X, X2. Comment on your findings.
10. This question should be answered using the Carseats data set.
(a) Fit a multiple regression model to predict Sales using Price,
Urban, and US.
(b) Provide an interpretation of each coefficient in the model. Be
careful—some of the variables in the model are qualitative!
(c) Write out the model in equation form, being careful to handle
the qualitative variables properly.
(d) For which of the predictors can you reject the null hypothesis
H0 : βj = 0?
(e) On the basis of your response to the previous question, fit a
smaller model that only uses the predictors for which there is
evidence of association with the outcome.
(f) How well do the models in (a) and (e) fit the data?
(g) Using the model from (e), obtain 95 % confidence intervals for
the coefficient(s).
(h) Is there evidence of outliers or high leverage observations in the
model from (e)?
11. In this problem we will investigate the t-statistic for the null hypoth-
esis H0 : β = 0 in simple linear regression without an intercept. To
begin, we generate a predictor x and a response y as follows.
rng = np.random.default_rng(1)
x = rng.normal(size=100)
y = 2 * x + rng.normal(size=100)
(a) Perform a simple linear regression of y onto x, without an in-
tercept. Report the coefficient estimate ˆβ, the standard error of
this coefficient estimate, and the t-statistic and p-value associ-
ated with the null hypothesis H0 : β = 0. Comment on these
results. (You can perform regression without an intercept using
the keywords argument intercept=False to ModelSpec().)
