172
4. Classification
• Mean-variance relationship: As mentioned earlier, under the Poisson
model, λ = E(Y ) = Var(Y ). Thus, by modeling bike usage with a
Poisson regression, we implicitly assume that mean bike usage in a
given hour equals the variance of bike usage during that hour. By
contrast, under a linear regression model, the variance of bike usage
always takes on a constant value. Recall from Figure 4.14 that in the
Bikeshare data, when biking conditions are favorable, both the mean
and the variance in bike usage are much higher than when conditions
are unfavorable. Thus, the Poisson regression model is able to handle
the mean-variance relationship seen in the Bikeshare data in a way
that the linear regression model is not.5
overdispersion
• nonnegative fitted values: There are no negative predictions using the
Poisson regression model. This is because the Poisson model itself
only allows for nonnegative values; see (4.35). By contrast, when we
fit a linear regression model to the Bikeshare data set, almost 10% of
the predictions were negative.
4.6.3
Generalized Linear Models in Greater Generality
We have now discussed three types of regression models: linear, logistic and
Poisson. These approaches share some common characteristics:
1. Each approach uses predictors X1, . . . , Xp to predict a response Y .
We assume that, conditional on X1, . . . , Xp, Y belongs to a certain
family of distributions. For linear regression, we typically assume that
Y follows a Gaussian or normal distribution. For logistic regression,
we assume that Y follows a Bernoulli distribution. Finally, for Poisson
regression, we assume that Y follows a Poisson distribution.
2. Each approach models the mean of Y as a function of the predictors.
In linear regression, the mean of Y takes the form
E(Y |X1, . . . , Xp) = β0 + β1X1 + · · · + βpXp,
(4.39)
i.e. it is a linear function of the predictors. For logistic regression, the
mean instead takes the form
E(Y |X1, . . . , Xp)
=
Pr(Y = 1|X1, . . . , Xp)
=
eβ0+β1X1+···+βpXp
1 + eβ0+β1X1+···+βpXp ,
(4.40)
while for Poisson regression it takes the form
E(Y |X1, . . . , Xp) = λ(X1, . . . , Xp) = eβ0+β1X1+···+βpXp.
(4.41)
Equations (4.39)–(4.41) can be expressed using a link function, η, which link function
5In fact, the variance in the Bikeshare data appears to be much higher than the
mean, a situation referred to as overdispersion. This causes the Z-values to be inflated
in Table 4.11. A more careful analysis should account for this overdispersion to obtain
more accurate Z-values, and there are a variety of methods for doing this. But they are
beyond the scope of this book.
