3.4 The Marketing Plan
109
In the Credit data, a regression of balance on age, rating, and limit
indicates that the predictors have VIF values of 1.01, 160.67, and 160.59.
As we suspected, there is considerable collinearity in the data!
When faced with the problem of collinearity, there are two simple solu-
tions. The first is to drop one of the problematic variables from the regres-
sion. This can usually be done without much compromise to the regression
fit, since the presence of collinearity implies that the information that this
variable provides about the response is redundant in the presence of the
other variables. For instance, if we regress balance onto age and limit,
without the rating predictor, then the resulting VIF values are close to
the minimum possible value of 1, and the R2 drops from 0.754 to 0.75.
So dropping rating from the set of predictors has effectively solved the
collinearity problem without compromising the fit. The second solution is
to combine the collinear variables together into a single predictor. For in-
stance, we might take the average of standardized versions of limit and
rating in order to create a new variable that measures credit worthiness.
3.4
The Marketing Plan
We now briefly return to the seven questions about the Advertising data
that we set out to answer at the beginning of this chapter.
1. Is there a relationship between sales and advertising budget?
This question can be answered by fitting a multiple regression model
of sales onto TV, radio, and newspaper, as in (3.20), and testing the
hypothesis H0 : βTV = βradio = βnewspaper = 0. In Section 3.2.2,
we showed that the F-statistic can be used to determine whether
or not we should reject this null hypothesis. In this case the p-value
corresponding to the F-statistic in Table 3.6 is very low, indicating
clear evidence of a relationship between advertising and sales.
2. How strong is the relationship?
We discussed two measures of model accuracy in Section 3.1.3. First,
the RSE estimates the standard deviation of the response from the
population regression line. For the Advertising data, the RSE is 1.69
units while the mean value for the response is 14.022, indicating a
percentage error of roughly 12 %. Second, the R2 statistic records
the percentage of variability in the response that is explained by
the predictors. The predictors explain almost 90 % of the variance in
sales. The RSE and R2 statistics are displayed in Table 3.6.
3. Which media are associated with sales?
To answer this question, we can examine the p-values associated with
each predictor’s t-statistic (Section 3.1.2). In the multiple linear re-
gression displayed in Table 3.4, the p-values for TV and radio are low,
but the p-value for newspaper is not. This suggests that only TV and
radio are related to sales. In Chapter 6 we explore this question in
greater detail.
