3.7 Exercises
131
(b) Now perform a simple linear regression of x onto y without an
intercept, and report the coefficient estimate, its standard error,
and the corresponding t-statistic and p-values associated with
the null hypothesis H0 : β = 0. Comment on these results.
(c) What is the relationship between the results obtained in (a) and
(b)?
(d) For the regression of Y onto X without an intercept, the t-
statistic for H0 : β = 0 takes the form ˆβ/SE(ˆβ), where ˆβ is
given by (3.38), and where
SE(ˆβ) =
@ )n
i=1(yi −xi ˆβ)2
(n −1) )n
i′=1 x2
i′ .
(These formulas are slightly different from those given in Sec-
tions 3.1.1 and 3.1.2, since here we are performing regression
without an intercept.) Show algebraically, and confirm numeri-
cally in R, that the t-statistic can be written as
(√n −1) )n
i=1 xiyi
5
()n
i=1 x2
i )()n
i′=1 y2
i′) −()n
i′=1 xi′yi′)2 .
(e) Using the results from (d), argue that the t-statistic for the re-
gression of y onto x is the same as the t-statistic for the regression
of x onto y.
(f) In R, show that when regression is performed with an intercept,
the t-statistic for H0 : β1 = 0 is the same for the regression of y
onto x as it is for the regression of x onto y.
12. This problem involves simple linear regression without an intercept.
(a) Recall that the coefficient estimate ˆβ for the linear regression of
Y onto X without an intercept is given by (3.38). Under what
circumstance is the coefficient estimate for the regression of X
onto Y the same as the coefficient estimate for the regression of
Y onto X?
(b) Generate an example in Python with n = 100 observations in
which the coefficient estimate for the regression of X onto Y
is different from the coefficient estimate for the regression of Y
onto X.
(c) Generate an example in Python with n = 100 observations in
which the coefficient estimate for the regression of X onto Y is
the same as the coefficient estimate for the regression of Y onto
X.
13. In this exercise you will create some simulated data and will fit simple
linear regression models to it. Make sure to use the default random
number generator with seed set to 1 prior to starting part (a) to
ensure consistent results.
