3.7 Exercises
133
(b) What is the correlation between x1 and x2? Create a scatterplot
displaying the relationship between the variables.
(c) Using this data, fit a least squares regression to predict y using
x1 and x2. Describe the results obtained. What are ˆβ0, ˆβ1, and
ˆβ2? How do these relate to the true β0, β1, and β2? Can you
reject the null hypothesis H0 : β1 = 0? How about the null
hypothesis H0 : β2 = 0?
(d) Now fit a least squares regression to predict y using only x1.
Comment on your results. Can you reject the null hypothesis
H0 : β1 = 0?
(e) Now fit a least squares regression to predict y using only x2.
Comment on your results. Can you reject the null hypothesis
H0 : β1 = 0?
(f) Do the results obtained in (c)–(e) contradict each other? Explain
your answer.
(g) Suppose we obtain one additional observation, which was unfor-
tunately mismeasured. We use the function np.concatenate() to np.conca-
tenate()
add this additional observation to each of x1, x2 and y.
x1 = np.concatenate([x1, [0.1]])
x2 = np.concatenate([x2, [0.8]])
y = np.concatenate([y, [6]])
Re-fit the linear models from (c) to (e) using this new data. What
effect does this new observation have on the each of the models?
In each model, is this observation an outlier? A high-leverage
point? Both? Explain your answers.
15. This problem involves the Boston data set, which we saw in the lab
for this chapter. We will now try to predict per capita crime rate
using the other variables in this data set. In other words, per capita
crime rate is the response, and the other variables are the predictors.
(a) For each predictor, fit a simple linear regression model to predict
the response. Describe your results. In which of the models is
there a statistically significant association between the predictor
and the response? Create some plots to back up your assertions.
(b) Fit a multiple regression model to predict the response using
all of the predictors. Describe your results. For which predictors
can we reject the null hypothesis H0 : βj = 0?
(c) How do your results from (a) compare to your results from (b)?
Create a plot displaying the univariate regression coefficients
from (a) on the x-axis, and the multiple regression coefficients
from (b) on the y-axis. That is, each predictor is displayed as a
single point in the plot. Its coefficient in a simple linear regres-
sion model is shown on the x-axis, and its coefficient estimate
in the multiple linear regression model is shown on the y-axis.
