4.4 Generative Models for Classification
147
Pr(Y = k|X = x) =
πkfk(x)
)K
l=1 πlfl(x)
.
(4.15)
In accordance with our earlier notation, we will use the abbreviation pk(x) =
Pr(Y = k|X = x); this is the posterior probability that an observation posterior
X = x belongs to the kth class. That is, it is the probability that the
observation belongs to the kth class, given the predictor value for that
observation.
Equation 4.15 suggests that instead of directly computing the posterior
probability pk(x) as in Section 4.3.1, we can simply plug in estimates of πk
and fk(x) into (4.15). In general, estimating πk is easy if we have a random
sample from the population: we simply compute the fraction of the training
observations that belong to the kth class. However, estimating the density
function fk(x) is much more challenging. As we will see, to estimate fk(x),
we will typically have to make some simplifying assumptions.
We know from Chapter 2 that the Bayes classifier, which classifies an
observation x to the class for which pk(x) is largest, has the lowest possible
error rate out of all classifiers. (Of course, this is only true if all of the
terms in (4.15) are correctly specified.) Therefore, if we can find a way to
estimate fk(x), then we can plug it into (4.15) in order to approximate the
Bayes classifier.
In the following sections, we discuss three classifiers that use different
estimates of fk(x) in (4.15) to approximate the Bayes classifier: linear dis-
criminant analysis, quadratic discriminant analysis, and naive Bayes.
4.4.1
Linear Discriminant Analysis for p = 1
For now, assume that p = 1—that is, we have only one predictor. We would
like to obtain an estimate for fk(x) that we can plug into (4.15) in order to
estimate pk(x). We will then classify an observation to the class for which
pk(x) is greatest. To estimate fk(x), we will first make some assumptions
about its form.
In particular, we assume that fk(x) is normal or Gaussian. In the one- normal
Gaussian
dimensional setting, the normal density takes the form
fk(x) =
1
√
2πσk
exp
*
−1
2σ2
k
(x −µk)2
+
,
(4.16)
where µk and σ2
k are the mean and variance parameters for the kth class.
For now, let us further assume that σ2
1 = · · · = σ2
K: that is, there is a shared
variance term across all K classes, which for simplicity we can denote by
σ2. Plugging (4.16) into (4.15), we find that
pk(x) =
πk
1
√
2πσ exp
'
−
1
2σ2 (x −µk)2(
)K
l=1 πl
1
√
2πσ exp
'
−
1
2σ2 (x −µl)2(.
(4.17)
(Note that in (4.17), πk denotes the prior probability that an observation
belongs to the kth class, not to be confused with π ≈3.14159, the math-
ematical constant.) The Bayes classifier2 involves assigning an observation
2Recall that the Bayes classifier assigns an observation to the class for which pk(x)
is largest. This is different from Bayes’ theorem in (4.15), which allows us to manipulate
conditional distributions.
