4
Classification
The linear regression model discussed in Chapter 3 assumes that the re-
sponse variable Y is quantitative. But in many situations, the response
variable is instead qualitative. For example, eye color is qualitative. Of- qualitative
ten qualitative variables are referred to as categorical; we will use these
terms interchangeably. In this chapter, we study approaches for predicting
qualitative responses, a process that is known as classification. Predicting classification
a qualitative response for an observation can be referred to as classifying
that observation, since it involves assigning the observation to a category,
or class. On the other hand, often the methods used for classification first
predict the probability that the observation belongs to each of the cate-
gories of a qualitative variable, as the basis for making the classification.
In this sense they also behave like regression methods.
There are many possible classification techniques, or classifiers, that one classifier
might use to predict a qualitative response. We touched on some of these
in Sections 2.1.5 and 2.2.3. In this chapter we discuss some widely-used
classifiers: logistic regression, linear discriminant analysis, quadratic dis- logistic
regression
linear
discriminant
analysis
criminant analysis, naive Bayes, and K-nearest neighbors. The discussion
quadratic
discriminant
analysis
naive Bayes
K-nearest
neighbors
of logistic regression is used as a jumping-off point for a discussion of gen-
eralized linear models, and in particular, Poisson regression. We discuss
generalized
linear
models
Poisson
regression
more computer-intensive classification methods in later chapters: these in-
clude generalized additive models (Chapter 7); trees, random forests, and
boosting (Chapter 8); and support vector machines (Chapter 9).
4.1
An Overview of Classification
Classification problems occur often, perhaps even more so than regression
problems. Some examples include:
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_4 
135
