4.4 Generative Models for Classification
155
ROC Curve
False positive rate
True positive rate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 4.8. A ROC curve for the LDA classifier on the Default data. It
traces out two types of error as we vary the threshold value for the posterior
probability of default. The actual thresholds are not shown. The true positive rate
is the sensitivity: the fraction of defaulters that are correctly identified, using
a given threshold value. The false positive rate is 1-specificity: the fraction of
non-defaulters that we classify incorrectly as defaulters, using that same threshold
value. The ideal ROC curve hugs the top left corner, indicating a high true positive
rate and a low false positive rate. The dotted line represents the “no information”
classifier; this is what we would expect if student status and credit card balance
are not associated with probability of default.
marized over all possible thresholds, is given by the area under the (ROC)
curve (AUC). An ideal ROC curve will hug the top left corner, so the larger area under
the (ROC)
curve
the AUC the better the classifier. For this data the AUC is 0.95, which is
close to the maximum of 1.0, so would be considered very good. We expect
a classifier that performs no better than chance to have an AUC of 0.5
(when evaluated on an independent test set not used in model training).
ROC curves are useful for comparing different classifiers, since they take
into account all possible thresholds. It turns out that the ROC curve for
the logistic regression model of Section 4.3.4 fit to these data is virtually
indistinguishable from this one for the LDA model, so we do not display it
here.
As we have seen above, varying the classifier threshold changes its true
positive and false positive rate. These are also called the sensitivity and one sensitivity
minus the specificity of our classifier. Since there is an almost bewildering specificity
array of terms used in this context, we now give a summary. Table 4.6
shows the possible results when applying a classifier (or diagnostic test)
to a population. To make the connection with the epidemiology literature,
we think of “+” as the “disease” that we are trying to detect, and “−” as
the “non-disease” state. To make the connection to the classical hypothesis
testing literature, we think of “−” as the null hypothesis and “+” as the
