94
3. Linear Regression
Coefficient
Std. error
t-statistic
p-value
Intercept
531.00
46.32
11.464
< 0.0001
region[South]
−12.50
56.68
−0.221
0.8260
region[West]
−18.69
65.02
−0.287
0.7740
TABLE 3.8. Least squares coefficient estimates associated with the regression of
balance onto region in the Credit data set. The linear model is given in (3.30).
That is, region is encoded via two dummy variables (3.28) and (3.29).
From Table 3.8, we see that the estimated balance for the baseline, East,
is $531.00. It is estimated that those in the South will have $18.69 less
debt than those in the East, and that those in the West will have $12.50
less debt than those in the East. However, the p-values associated with the
coefficient estimates for the two dummy variables are very large, suggesting
no statistical evidence of a real difference in average credit card balance
between South and East or between West and East.12 Once again, the
level selected as the baseline category is arbitrary, and the final predictions
for each group will be the same regardless of this choice. However, the
coefficients and their p-values do depend on the choice of dummy variable
coding. Rather than rely on the individual coefficients, we can use an F-test
to test H0 : β1 = β2 = 0; this does not depend on the coding. This F-test
has a p-value of 0.96, indicating that we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that there is no relationship between balance and region.
Using this dummy variable approach presents no difficulties when in-
corporating both quantitative and qualitative predictors. For example, to
regress balance on both a quantitative variable such as income and a qual-
itative variable such as student, we must simply create a dummy variable
for student and then fit a multiple regression model using income and the
dummy variable as predictors for credit card balance.
There are many different ways of coding qualitative variables besides
the dummy variable approach taken here. All of these approaches lead to
equivalent model fits, but the coefficients are different and have different
interpretations, and are designed to measure particular contrasts. This topic contrast
is beyond the scope of the book.
3.3.2
Extensions of the Linear Model
The standard linear regression model (3.19) provides interpretable results
and works quite well on many real-world problems. However, it makes sev-
eral highly restrictive assumptions that are often violated in practice. Two
of the most important assumptions state that the relationship between the
predictors and response are additive and linear. The additivity assumption additive
linear
means that the association between a predictor Xj and the response Y does
not depend on the values of the other predictors. The linearity assumption
states that the change in the response Y associated with a one-unit change
in Xj is constant, regardless of the value of Xj. In later chapters of this
book, we examine a number of sophisticated methods that relax these two
12There could still in theory be a difference between South and West, although the
data here does not suggest any difference.
