4.4 Generative Models for Classification
159
pretty decent results, especially in settings where n is not large enough rela-
tive to p for us to effectively estimate the joint distribution of the predictors
within each class. In fact, since estimating a joint distribution requires such
a huge amount of data, naive Bayes is a good choice in a wide range of set-
tings. Essentially, the naive Bayes assumption introduces some bias, but
reduces variance, leading to a classifier that works quite well in practice as
a result of the bias-variance trade-off.
Once we have made the naive Bayes assumption, we can plug (4.29) into
(4.15) to obtain an expression for the posterior probability,
Pr(Y = k|X = x) =
ПҖk Г— fk1(x1) Г— fk2(x2) Г— В· В· В· Г— fkp(xp)
)K
l=1 ПҖl Г— fl1(x1) Г— fl2(x2) Г— В· В· В· Г— flp(xp)
(4.30)
for k = 1, . . . , K.
To estimate the one-dimensional density function fkj using training data
x1j, . . . , xnj, we have a few options.
вҖў If Xj is quantitative, then we can assume that Xj|Y = k вҲјN(Вөjk, Пғ2
jk).
In other words, we assume that within each class, the jth predictor is
drawn from a (univariate) normal distribution. While this may sound
a bit like QDA, there is one key difference, in that here we are assum-
ing that the predictors are independent; this amounts to QDA with
an additional assumption that the class-specific covariance matrix is
diagonal.
вҖў If Xj is quantitative, then another option is to use a non-parametric
estimate for fkj. A very simple way to do this is by making a his-
togram for the observations of the jth predictor within each class.
Then we can estimate fkj(xj) as the fraction of the training obser-
vations in the kth class that belong to the same histogram bin as
xj. Alternatively, we can use a kernel density estimator, which is kernel
density
estimator
essentially a smoothed version of a histogram.
вҖў If Xj is qualitative, then we can simply count the proportion of train-
ing observations for the jth predictor corresponding to each class. For
instance, suppose that Xj вҲҲ{1, 2, 3}, and we have 100 observations
in the kth class. Suppose that the jth predictor takes on values of 1,
2, and 3 in 32, 55, and 13 of those observations, respectively. Then
we can estimate fkj as
ЛҶfkj(xj) =
пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈІ
пЈҙ
пЈі
0.32
if xj = 1
0.55
if xj = 2
0.13
if xj = 3.
We now consider the naive Bayes classifier in a toy example with p = 3
predictors and K = 2 classes. The first two predictors are quantitative,
and the third predictor is qualitative with three levels. Suppose further
that ЛҶПҖ1 = ЛҶПҖ2 = 0.5. The estimated density functions ЛҶfkj for k = 1, 2
and j = 1, 2, 3 are displayed in Figure 4.10. Now suppose that we wish
to classify a new observation, xвҲ—= (0.4, 1.5, 1)T . It turns out that in this
