3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model
95
assumptions. Here, we briefly examine some common classical approaches
for extending the linear model.
Removing the Additive Assumption
In our previous analysis of the Advertising data, we concluded that both TV
and radio seem to be associated with sales. The linear models that formed
the basis for this conclusion assumed that the effect on sales of increasing
one advertising medium is independent of the amount spent on the other
media. For example, the linear model (3.20) states that the average increase
in sales associated with a one-unit increase in TV is always β1, regardless
of the amount spent on radio.
However, this simple model may be incorrect. Suppose that spending
money on radio advertising actually increases the effectiveness of TV ad-
vertising, so that the slope term for TV should increase as radio increases.
In this situation, given a fixed budget of $100,000, spending half on radio
and half on TV may increase sales more than allocating the entire amount
to either TV or to radio. In marketing, this is known as a synergy effect,
and in statistics it is referred to as an interaction effect. Figure 3.5 sug-
gests that such an effect may be present in the advertising data. Notice
that when levels of either TV or radio are low, then the true sales are lower
than predicted by the linear model. But when advertising is split between
the two media, then the model tends to underestimate sales.
Consider the standard linear regression model with two variables,
Y = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + ϵ.
According to this model, a one-unit increase in X1 is associated with an
average increase in Y of β1 units. Notice that the presence of X2 does
not alter this statement—that is, regardless of the value of X2, a one-
unit increase in X1 is associated with a β1-unit increase in Y . One way of
extending this model is to include a third predictor, called an interaction
term, which is constructed by computing the product of X1 and X2. This
results in the model
Y = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + β3X1X2 + ϵ.
(3.31)
How does inclusion of this interaction term relax the additive assumption?
Notice that (3.31) can be rewritten as
Y
=
β0 + (β1 + β3X2)X1 + β2X2 + ϵ
(3.32)
=
β0 + ˜β1X1 + β2X2 + ϵ
where ˜β1 = β1 + β3X2. Since ˜β1 is now a function of X2, the association
between X1 and Y is no longer constant: a change in the value of X2 will
change the association between X1 and Y . A similar argument shows that
a change in the value of X1 changes the association between X2 and Y .
For example, suppose that we are interested in studying the productiv-
ity of a factory. We wish to predict the number of units produced on the
basis of the number of production lines and the total number of workers.
It seems likely that the effect of increasing the number of production lines
