3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model
91
3.3
Other Considerations in the Regression Model
3.3.1
Qualitative Predictors
In our discussion so far, we have assumed that all variables in our linear
regression model are quantitative. But in practice, this is not necessarily
the case; often some predictors are qualitative.
For example, the Credit data set displayed in Figure 3.6 records variables
for a number of credit card holders. The response is balance (average credit
card debt for each individual) and there are several quantitative predictors:
age, cards (number of credit cards), education (years of education), income
(in thousands of dollars), limit (credit limit), and rating (credit rating).
Each panel of Figure 3.6 is a scatterplot for a pair of variables whose iden-
tities are given by the corresponding row and column labels. For example,
the scatterplot directly to the right of the word “Balance” depicts balance
versus age, while the plot directly to the right of “Age” corresponds to
age versus cards. In addition to these quantitative variables, we also have
four qualitative variables: own (house ownership), student (student status),
status (marital status), and region (East, West or South).
Predictors with Only Two Levels
Suppose that we wish to investigate differences in credit card balance be-
tween those who own a house and those who don’t, ignoring the other vari-
ables for the moment. If a qualitative predictor (also known as a factor) factor
only has two levels, or possible values, then incorporating it into a regres- level
sion model is very simple. We simply create an indicator or dummy variable dummy
variable
that takes on two possible numerical values.10 For example, based on the
own variable, we can create a new variable that takes the form
xi =
=
1
if ith person owns a house
0
if ith person does not own a house,
(3.26)
and use this variable as a predictor in the regression equation. This results
in the model
yi = β0 + β1xi + ϵi =
=
β0 + β1 + ϵi
if ith person owns a house
β0 + ϵi
if ith person does not.
(3.27)
Now β0 can be interpreted as the average credit card balance among those
who do not own, β0 + β1 as the average credit card balance among those
who do own their house, and β1 as the average difference in credit card
balance between owners and non-owners.
Table 3.7 displays the coefficient estimates and other information asso-
ciated with the model (3.27). The average credit card debt for non-owners
is estimated to be $509.80, whereas owners are estimated to carry $19.73
in additional debt for a total of $509.80 + $19.73 = $529.53. However, we
10In the machine learning community, the creation of dummy variables to handle
qualitative predictors is known as “one-hot encoding”.
