150
4. Classification
x1
x1
x2
x2
FIGURE 4.5.
Two multivariate Gaussian density functions are shown, with
p = 2. Left: The two predictors are uncorrelated. Right: The two variables have
a correlation of 0.7.
4.4.2
Linear Discriminant Analysis for p >1
We now extend the LDA classifier to the case of multiple predictors. To
do this, we will assume that X = (X1, X2, . . . , Xp) is drawn from a multi-
variate Gaussian (or multivariate normal) distribution, with a class-specific multivariate
Gaussian
mean vector and a common covariance matrix. We begin with a brief review
of this distribution.
The multivariate Gaussian distribution assumes that each individual pre-
dictor follows a one-dimensional normal distribution, as in (4.16), with some
correlation between each pair of predictors. Two examples of multivariate
Gaussian distributions with p = 2 are shown in Figure 4.5. The height of
the surface at any particular point represents the probability that both X1
and X2 fall in a small region around that point. In either panel, if the sur-
face is cut along the X1 axis or along the X2 axis, the resulting cross-section
will have the shape of a one-dimensional normal distribution. The left-hand
panel of Figure 4.5 illustrates an example in which Var(X1) = Var(X2) and
Cor(X1, X2) = 0; this surface has a characteristic bell shape. However, the
bell shape will be distorted if the predictors are correlated or have unequal
variances, as is illustrated in the right-hand panel of Figure 4.5. In this
situation, the base of the bell will have an elliptical, rather than circular,
shape. To indicate that a p-dimensional random variable X has a multi-
variate Gaussian distribution, we write X ∼N(µ, Σ). Here E(X) = µ is
the mean of X (a vector with p components), and Cov(X) = Σ is the
p × p covariance matrix of X. Formally, the multivariate Gaussian density
is defined as
f(x) =
1
(2π)p/2|Σ|1/2 exp
*
−1
2(x −µ)T Σ−1(x −µ)
+
.
(4.23)
In the case of p > 1 predictors, the LDA classifier assumes that the
observations in the kth class are drawn from a multivariate Gaussian dis-
tribution N(µk, Σ), where µk is a class-specific mean vector, and Σ is a
covariance matrix that is common to all K classes. Plugging the density
function for the kth class, fk(X = x), into (4.15) and performing a little
bit of algebra reveals that the Bayes classifier assigns an observation X = x
