4.4 Generative Models for Classification
153
the default category. It is often of interest to determine which of these two
types of errors are being made. A confusion matrix, shown for the Default confusion
matrix
data in Table 4.4, is a convenient way to display this information. The
table reveals that LDA predicted that a total of 104 people would default.
Of these people, 81 actually defaulted and 23 did not. Hence only 23 out
of 9,667 of the individuals who did not default were incorrectly labeled.
This looks like a pretty low error rate! However, of the 333 individuals who
defaulted, 252 (or 75.7 %) were missed by LDA. So while the overall error
rate is low, the error rate among individuals who defaulted is very high.
From the perspective of a credit card company that is trying to identify
high-risk individuals, an error rate of 252/333 = 75.7 % among individuals
who default may well be unacceptable.
Class-specific performance is also important in medicine and biology,
where the terms sensitivity and specificity characterize the performance of sensitivity
specificity
a classifier or screening test. In this case the sensitivity is the percent-
age of true defaulters that are identified; it equals 24.3 %. The specificity
is the percentage of non-defaulters that are correctly identified; it equals
(1 −23/9667) = 99.8 %.
Why does LDA do such a poor job of classifying the customers who de-
fault? In other words, why does it have such low sensitivity? As we have
seen, LDA is trying to approximate the Bayes classifier, which has the low-
est total error rate out of all classifiers. That is, the Bayes classifier will
yield the smallest possible total number of misclassified observations, re-
gardless of the class from which the errors stem. Some misclassifications will
result from incorrectly assigning a customer who does not default to the
default class, and others will result from incorrectly assigning a customer
who defaults to the non-default class. In contrast, a credit card company
might particularly wish to avoid incorrectly classifying an individual who
will default, whereas incorrectly classifying an individual who will not de-
fault, though still to be avoided, is less problematic. We will now see that it
is possible to modify LDA in order to develop a classifier that better meets
the credit card company’s needs.
The Bayes classifier works by assigning an observation to the class for
which the posterior probability pk(X) is greatest. In the two-class case, this
amounts to assigning an observation to the default class if
Pr(default = Yes|X = x) > 0.5.
(4.26)
Thus, the Bayes classifier, and by extension LDA, uses a threshold of 50 %
for the posterior probability of default in order to assign an observation
to the default class. However, if we are concerned about incorrectly pre-
dicting the default status for individuals who default, then we can consider
lowering this threshold. For instance, we might label any customer with a
posterior probability of default above 20 % to the default class. In other
words, instead of assigning an observation to the default class if (4.26)
holds, we could instead assign an observation to this class if
Pr(default = Yes|X = x) > 0.2.
(4.27)
The error rates that result from taking this approach are shown in Table 4.5.
Now LDA predicts that 430 individuals will default. Of the 333 individuals
who default, LDA correctly predicts all but 138, or 41.4 %. This is a vast
