132
3. Linear Regression
(a) Using the normal() method of your random number generator,
create a vector, x, containing 100 observations drawn from a
N(0, 1) distribution. This represents a feature, X.
(b) Using the normal() method, create a vector, eps, containing 100
observations drawn from a N(0, 0.25) distribution—a normal
distribution with mean zero and variance 0.25.
(c) Using x and eps, generate a vector y according to the model
Y = −1 + 0.5X + ϵ.
(3.39)
What is the length of the vector y? What are the values of β0
and β1 in this linear model?
(d) Create a scatterplot displaying the relationship between x and
y. Comment on what you observe.
(e) Fit a least squares linear model to predict y using x. Comment
on the model obtained. How do ˆβ0 and ˆβ1 compare to β0 and
β1?
(f) Display the least squares line on the scatterplot obtained in (d).
Draw the population regression line on the plot, in a different
color. Use the legend() method of the axes to create an appro-
priate legend.
(g) Now fit a polynomial regression model that predicts y using x
and x2. Is there evidence that the quadratic term improves the
model fit? Explain your answer.
(h) Repeat (a)–(f) after modifying the data generation process in
such a way that there is less noise in the data. The model (3.39)
should remain the same. You can do this by decreasing the vari-
ance of the normal distribution used to generate the error term
ϵ in (b). Describe your results.
(i) Repeat (a)–(f) after modifying the data generation process in
such a way that there is more noise in the data. The model
(3.39) should remain the same. You can do this by increasing
the variance of the normal distribution used to generate the
error term ϵ in (b). Describe your results.
(j) What are the confidence intervals for β0 and β1 based on the
original data set, the noisier data set, and the less noisy data
set? Comment on your results.
14. This problem focuses on the collinearity problem.
(a) Perform the following commands in Python:
rng = np.random.default_rng(10)
x1 = rng.uniform(0, 1, size=100)
x2 = 0.5 * x1 + rng.normal(size=100) / 10
y = 2 + 2 * x1 + 0.3 * x2 + rng.normal(size=100)
The last line corresponds to creating a linear model in which y is
a function of x1 and x2. Write out the form of the linear model.
What are the regression coefficients?
