4.3 Logistic Regression
141
to fit a logistic regression model is as follows: we seek estimates for β0 and
β1 such that the predicted probability ˆp(xi) of default for each individual,
using (4.2), corresponds as closely as possible to the individual’s observed
default status. In other words, we try to find ˆβ0 and ˆβ1 such that plugging
these estimates into the model for p(X), given in (4.2), yields a number
close to one for all individuals who defaulted, and a number close to zero
for all individuals who did not. This intuition can be formalized using a
mathematical equation called a likelihood function:
likelihood
function
ℓ(β0, β1) =
E
i:yi=1
p(xi)
E
i′:yi′=0
(1 −p(xi′)).
(4.5)
The estimates ˆβ0 and ˆβ1 are chosen to maximize this likelihood function.
Maximum likelihood is a very general approach that is used to fit many
of the non-linear models that we examine throughout this book. In the
linear regression setting, the least squares approach is in fact a special case
of maximum likelihood. The mathematical details of maximum likelihood
are beyond the scope of this book. However, in general, logistic regression
and other models can be easily fit using statistical software such as R, and
so we do not need to concern ourselves with the details of the maximum
likelihood fitting procedure.
Table 4.1 shows the coefficient estimates and related information that
result from fitting a logistic regression model on the Default data in order
to predict the probability of default=Yes using balance. We see that ˆβ1 =
0.0055; this indicates that an increase in balance is associated with an
increase in the probability of default. To be precise, a one-unit increase in
balance is associated with an increase in the log odds of default by 0.0055
units.
Many aspects of the logistic regression output shown in Table 4.1 are
similar to the linear regression output of Chapter 3. For example, we can
measure the accuracy of the coefficient estimates by computing their stan-
dard errors. The z-statistic in Table 4.1 plays the same role as the t-statistic
in the linear regression output, for example in Table 3.1 on page 77. For
instance, the z-statistic associated with β1 is equal to ˆβ1/SE(ˆβ1), and so a
large (absolute) value of the z-statistic indicates evidence against the null
hypothesis H0 : β1 = 0. This null hypothesis implies that p(X) =
eβ0
1+eβ0 : in
other words, that the probability of default does not depend on balance.
Since the p-value associated with balance in Table 4.1 is tiny, we can reject
H0. In other words, we conclude that there is indeed an association between
balance and probability of default. The estimated intercept in Table 4.1
is typically not of interest; its main purpose is to adjust the average fitted
probabilities to the proportion of ones in the data (in this case, the overall
default rate).
4.3.3
Making Predictions
Once the coefficients have been estimated, we can compute the probability
of default for any given credit card balance. For example, using the coeffi-
cient estimates given in Table 4.1, we predict that the default probability
