111
in the regression model in order to accommodate non-additive rela-
tionships. A small p-value associated with the interaction term indi-
cates the presence of such relationships. Figure 3.5 suggested that the
Advertising data may not be additive. Including an interaction term
in the model results in a substantial increase in R2, from around 90 %
to almost 97 %.
3.5
Comparison of Linear Regression
with K-Nearest Neighbors
As discussed in Chapter 2, linear regression is an example of a parametric
approach because it assumes a linear functional form for f(X). Parametric
methods have several advantages. They are often easy to fit, because one
need estimate only a small number of coefficients. In the case of linear re-
gression, the coefficients have simple interpretations, and tests of statistical
significance can be easily performed. But parametric methods do have a
disadvantage: by construction, they make strong assumptions about the
form of f(X). If the specified functional form is far from the truth, and
prediction accuracy is our goal, then the parametric method will perform
poorly. For instance, if we assume a linear relationship between X and Y
but the true relationship is far from linear, then the resulting model will
provide a poor fit to the data, and any conclusions drawn from it will be
suspect.
In contrast, non-parametric methods do not explicitly assume a para-
metric form for f(X), and thereby provide an alternative and more flexi-
ble approach for performing regression. We discuss various non-parametric
methods in this book. Here we consider one of the simplest and best-known
non-parametric methods, K-nearest neighbors regression (KNN regression). K-nearest
neighbors
regression
The KNN regression method is closely related to the KNN classifier dis-
cussed in Chapter 2. Given a value for K and a prediction point x0, KNN
regression first identifies the K training observations that are closest to
x0, represented by N0. It then estimates f(x0) using the average of all the
training responses in N0. In other words,
ˆf(x0) = 1
K
0
xi∈N0
yi.
Figure 3.16 illustrates two KNN fits on a data set with p = 2 predictors. The
fit with K = 1 is shown in the left-hand panel, while the right-hand panel
corresponds to K = 9. We see that when K = 1, the KNN fit perfectly
interpolates the training observations, and consequently takes the form
of a step function. When K = 9, the KNN fit still is a step function, but
averaging over nine observations results in much smaller regions of constant
prediction, and consequently a smoother fit. In general, the optimal value
for K will depend on the bias-variance tradeoff, which we introduced in
Chapter 2. A small value for K provides the most flexible fit, which will
have low bias but high variance. This variance is due to the fact that the
prediction in a given region is entirely dependent on just one observation.
3.5 Comparison of Linear Regression with K-Nearest Neighbors
