3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model
107
 21.25 
 21.5 
 21.8 
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
 21.5 
 21.8 
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
βLimit
βLimit
βAge
βRating
FIGURE 3.15. Contour plots for the RSS values as a function of the parameters
β for various regressions involving the Credit data set. In each plot, the black
dots represent the coefficient values corresponding to the minimum RSS. Left:
A contour plot of RSS for the regression of balance onto age and limit. The
minimum value is well defined. Right: A contour plot of RSS for the regression
of balance onto rating and limit. Because of the collinearity, there are many
pairs (βLimit, βRating) with a similar value for RSS.
that correspond to the same RSS, with ellipses nearest to the center tak-
ing on the lowest values of RSS. The black dots and associated dashed
lines represent the coefficient estimates that result in the smallest possible
RSS—in other words, these are the least squares estimates. The axes for
limit and age have been scaled so that the plot includes possible coeffi-
cient estimates that are up to four standard errors on either side of the
least squares estimates. Thus the plot includes all plausible values for the
coefficients. For example, we see that the true limit coefficient is almost
certainly somewhere between 0.15 and 0.20.
In contrast, the right-hand panel of Figure 3.15 displays contour plots
of the RSS associated with possible coefficient estimates for the regression
of balance onto limit and rating, which we know to be highly collinear.
Now the contours run along a narrow valley; there is a broad range of
values for the coefficient estimates that result in equal values for RSS.
Hence a small change in the data could cause the pair of coefficient values
that yield the smallest RSS—that is, the least squares estimates—to move
anywhere along this valley. This results in a great deal of uncertainty in the
coefficient estimates. Notice that the scale for the limit coefficient now runs
from roughly −0.2 to 0.2; this is an eight-fold increase over the plausible
range of the limit coefficient in the regression with age. Interestingly, even
though the limit and rating coefficients now have much more individual
uncertainty, they will almost certainly lie somewhere in this contour valley.
For example, we would not expect the true value of the limit and rating
coefficients to be −0.1 and 1 respectively, even though such a value is
plausible for each coefficient individually.
Since collinearity reduces the accuracy of the estimates of the regression
coefficients, it causes the standard error for ˆβj to grow. Recall that the
t-statistic for each predictor is calculated by dividing ˆβj by its standard
