4.4 Generative Models for Classification
149
particular, the following estimates are used:
ˆµk
=
1
nk
0
i:yi=k
xi
ˆσ2
=
1
n −K
K
0
k=1
0
i:yi=k
(xi −ˆµk)2
(4.20)
where n is the total number of training observations, and nk is the number
of training observations in the kth class. The estimate for µk is simply the
average of all the training observations from the kth class, while ˆσ2 can
be seen as a weighted average of the sample variances for each of the K
classes. Sometimes we have knowledge of the class membership probabili-
ties π1, . . . , πK, which can be used directly. In the absence of any additional
information, LDA estimates πk using the proportion of the training obser-
vations that belong to the kth class. In other words,
ˆπk = nk/n.
(4.21)
The LDA classifier plugs the estimates given in (4.20) and (4.21) into (4.18),
and assigns an observation X = x to the class for which
ˆδk(x) = x · ˆµk
ˆσ2 −ˆµ2
k
2ˆσ2 + log(ˆπk)
(4.22)
is largest. The word linear in the classifier’s name stems from the fact
that the discriminant functions ˆδk(x) in (4.22) are linear functions of x (as discriminant
function
opposed to a more complex function of x).
The right-hand panel of Figure 4.4 displays a histogram of a random
sample of 20 observations from each class. To implement LDA, we began
by estimating πk, µk, and σ2 using (4.20) and (4.21). We then computed the
decision boundary, shown as a black solid line, that results from assigning
an observation to the class for which (4.22) is largest. All points to the left
of this line will be assigned to the green class, while points to the right of
this line are assigned to the purple class. In this case, since n1 = n2 = 20,
we have ˆπ1 = ˆπ2. As a result, the decision boundary corresponds to the
midpoint between the sample means for the two classes, (ˆµ1 + ˆµ2)/2. The
figure indicates that the LDA decision boundary is slightly to the left of
the optimal Bayes decision boundary, which instead equals (µ1 + µ2)/2 =
0. How well does the LDA classifier perform on this data? Since this is
simulated data, we can generate a large number of test observations in order
to compute the Bayes error rate and the LDA test error rate. These are
10.6 % and 11.1 %, respectively. In other words, the LDA classifier’s error
rate is only 0.5 % above the smallest possible error rate! This indicates that
LDA is performing pretty well on this data set.
To reiterate, the LDA classifier results from assuming that the obser-
vations within each class come from a normal distribution with a class-
specific mean and a common variance σ2, and plugging estimates for these
parameters into the Bayes classifier. In Section 4.4.3, we will consider a less
stringent set of assumptions, by allowing the observations in the kth class
to have a class-specific variance, σ2
k.
