3.7 Exercises
129
6. Using (3.4), argue that in the case of simple linear regression, the
least squares line always passes through the point (¯x, ¯y).
7. It is claimed in the text that in the case of simple linear regression
of Y onto X, the R2 statistic (3.17) is equal to the square of the
correlation between X and Y (3.18). Prove that this is the case. For
simplicity, you may assume that ¯x = ¯y = 0.
Applied
8. This question involves the use of simple linear regression on the Auto
data set.
(a) Use the sm.OLS() function to perform a simple linear regression
with mpg as the response and horsepower as the predictor. Use
the summarize() function to print the results. Comment on the
output. For example:
i. Is there a relationship between the predictor and the re-
sponse?
ii. How strong is the relationship between the predictor and
the response?
iii. Is the relationship between the predictor and the response
positive or negative?
iv. What is the predicted mpg associated with a horsepower of
98? What are the associated 95 % confidence and prediction
intervals?
(b) Plot the response and the predictor in a new set of axes ax. Use
the ax.axline() method or the abline() function defined in the
lab to display the least squares regression line.
(c) Produce some of diagnostic plots of the least squares regression
fit as described in the lab. Comment on any problems you see
with the fit.
9. This question involves the use of multiple linear regression on the
Auto data set.
(a) Produce a scatterplot matrix which includes all of the variables
in the data set.
(b) Compute the matrix of correlations between the variables using
the DataFrame.corr() method.
.corr()
(c) Use the sm.OLS() function to perform a multiple linear regression
with mpg as the response and all other variables except name as
the predictors. Use the summarize() function to print the results.
Comment on the output. For instance:
i. Is there a relationship between the predictors and the re-
sponse? Use the anova_lm() function from statsmodels to
answer this question.
