3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model
101
yi −ˆyi, versus the predictor xi. In the case of a multiple regression model,
since there are multiple predictors, we instead plot the residuals versus
the predicted (or fitted) values ˆyi. Ideally, the residual plot will show no fitted
discernible pattern. The presence of a pattern may indicate a problem with
some aspect of the linear model.
The left panel of Figure 3.9 displays a residual plot from the linear re-
gression of mpg onto horsepower on the Auto data set that was illustrated in
Figure 3.8. The red line is a smooth fit to the residuals, which is displayed in
order to make it easier to identify any trends. The residuals exhibit a clear
U-shape, which provides a strong indication of non-linearity in the data.
In contrast, the right-hand panel of Figure 3.9 displays the residual plot
that results from the model (3.36), which contains a quadratic term. There
appears to be little pattern in the residuals, suggesting that the quadratic
term improves the fit to the data.
If the residual plot indicates that there are non-linear associations in the
data, then a simple approach is to use non-linear transformations of the
predictors, such as log X,
√
X, and X2, in the regression model. In the
later chapters of this book, we will discuss other more advanced non-linear
approaches for addressing this issue.
2. Correlation of Error Terms
An important assumption of the linear regression model is that the error
terms, ϵ1, ϵ2, . . . , ϵn, are uncorrelated. What does this mean? For instance,
if the errors are uncorrelated, then the fact that ϵi is positive provides
little or no information about the sign of ϵi+1. The standard errors that
are computed for the estimated regression coefficients or the fitted values
are based on the assumption of uncorrelated error terms. If in fact there is
correlation among the error terms, then the estimated standard errors will
tend to underestimate the true standard errors. As a result, confidence and
prediction intervals will be narrower than they should be. For example,
a 95 % confidence interval may in reality have a much lower probability
than 0.95 of containing the true value of the parameter. In addition, p-
values associated with the model will be lower than they should be; this
could cause us to erroneously conclude that a parameter is statistically
significant. In short, if the error terms are correlated, we may have an
unwarranted sense of confidence in our model.
As an extreme example, suppose we accidentally doubled our data, lead-
ing to observations and error terms identical in pairs. If we ignored this, our
standard error calculations would be as if we had a sample of size 2n, when
in fact we have only n samples. Our estimated parameters would be the
same for the 2n samples as for the n samples, but the confidence intervals
would be narrower by a factor of
√
2!
Why might correlations among the error terms occur? Such correlations
frequently occur in the context of time series data, which consists of ob- time series
servations for which measurements are obtained at discrete points in time.
In many cases, observations that are obtained at adjacent time points will
have positively correlated errors. In order to determine if this is the case for
a given data set, we can plot the residuals from our model as a function of
time. If the errors are uncorrelated, then there should be no discernible pat-
