138
4. Classification
convert a qualitative response variable with more than two levels into a
quantitative response that is ready for linear regression.
For a binary (two level) qualitative response, the situation is better. For binary
instance, perhaps there are only two possibilities for the patient’s medical
condition: stroke and drug overdose. We could then potentially use the
dummy variable approach from Section 3.3.1 to code the response as follows:
Y =
=
0
if stroke;
1
if drug overdose.
We could then fit a linear regression to this binary response, and predict
drug overdose if ˆY > 0.5 and stroke otherwise. In the binary case it is not
hard to show that even if we flip the above coding, linear regression will
produce the same final predictions.
For a binary response with a 0/1 coding as above, regression by least
squares is not completely unreasonable: it can be shown that the X ˆβ ob-
tained using linear regression is in fact an estimate of Pr(drug overdose|X)
in this special case. However, if we use linear regression, some of our es-
timates might be outside the [0, 1] interval (see Figure 4.2), making them
hard to interpret as probabilities! Nevertheless, the predictions provide an
ordering and can be interpreted as crude probability estimates. Curiously,
it turns out that the classifications that we get if we use linear regression
to predict a binary response will be the same as for the linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) procedure we discuss in Section 4.4.
To summarize, there are at least two reasons not to perform classifica-
tion using a regression method: (a) a regression method cannot accommo-
date a qualitative response with more than two classes; (b) a regression
method will not provide meaningful estimates of Pr(Y |X), even with just
two classes. Thus, it is preferable to use a classification method that is
truly suited for qualitative response values. In the next section, we present
logistic regression, which is well-suited for the case of a binary qualita-
tive response; in later sections we will cover classification methods that are
appropriate when the qualitative response has two or more classes.
4.3
Logistic Regression
Consider again the Default data set, where the response default falls into
one of two categories, Yes or No. Rather than modeling this response Y
directly, logistic regression models the probability that Y belongs to a par-
ticular category.
For the Default data, logistic regression models the probability of default.
For example, the probability of default given balance can be written as
Pr(default = Yes|balance).
The values of Pr(default = Yes|balance), which we abbreviate p(balance),
will range between 0 and 1. Then for any given value of balance, a prediction
can be made for default. For example, one might predict default = Yes
