146
4. Classification
Thus, rather than estimating coefficients for K −1 classes, we actually
estimate coefficients for all K classes. It is not hard to see that as a result
of (4.13), the log odds ratio between the kth and k′th classes equals
log
% Pr(Y = k|X = x)
Pr(Y = k′|X = x)
&
= (βk0 −βk′0) + (βk1 −βk′1)x1 + · · · + (βkp −βk′p)xp.
(4.14)
4.4
Generative Models for Classification
Logistic regression involves directly modeling Pr(Y = k|X = x) using the
logistic function, given by (4.7) for the case of two response classes. In
statistical jargon, we model the conditional distribution of the response Y ,
given the predictor(s) X. We now consider an alternative and less direct
approach to estimating these probabilities. In this new approach, we model
the distribution of the predictors X separately in each of the response
classes (i.e. for each value of Y ). We then use Bayes’ theorem to flip these
around into estimates for Pr(Y = k|X = x). When the distribution of X
within each class is assumed to be normal, it turns out that the model is
very similar in form to logistic regression.
Why do we need another method, when we have logistic regression?
There are several reasons:
• When there is substantial separation between the two classes, the
parameter estimates for the logistic regression model are surprisingly
unstable. The methods that we consider in this section do not suffer
from this problem.
• If the distribution of the predictors X is approximately normal in
each of the classes and the sample size is small, then the approaches
in this section may be more accurate than logistic regression.
• The methods in this section can be naturally extended to the case
of more than two response classes. (In the case of more than two
response classes, we can also use multinomial logistic regression from
Section 4.3.5.)
Suppose that we wish to classify an observation into one of K classes,
where K ≥2. In other words, the qualitative response variable Y can take
on K possible distinct and unordered values. Let πk represent the overall
or prior probability that a randomly chosen observation comes from the prior
kth class. Let fk(X) ≡Pr(X|Y = k)1 denote the density function of X
density
function
for an observation that comes from the kth class. In other words, fk(x) is
relatively large if there is a high probability that an observation in the kth
class has X ≈x, and fk(x) is small if it is very unlikely that an observation
in the kth class has X ≈x. Then Bayes’ theorem states that
Bayes’
theorem
1Technically, this definition is only correct if X is a qualitative random variable. If
X is quantitative, then fk(x)dx corresponds to the probability of X falling in a small
region dx around x.
