110
3. Linear Regression
4. How large is the association between each medium and sales?
We saw in Section 3.1.2 that the standard error of ˆβj can be used to
construct confidence intervals for βj. For the Advertising data, we
can use the results in Table 3.4 to compute the 95 % confidence inter-
vals for the coefficients in a multiple regression model using all three
media budgets as predictors. The confidence intervals are as follows:
(0.043, 0.049) for TV, (0.172, 0.206) for radio, and (−0.013, 0.011) for
newspaper. The confidence intervals for TV and radio are narrow and
far from zero, providing evidence that these media are related to
sales. But the interval for newspaper includes zero, indicating that
the variable is not statistically significant given the values of TV and
radio.
We saw in Section 3.3.3 that collinearity can result in very wide stan-
dard errors. Could collinearity be the reason that the confidence in-
terval associated with newspaper is so wide? The VIF scores are 1.005,
1.145, and 1.145 for TV, radio, and newspaper, suggesting no evidence
of collinearity.
In order to assess the association of each medium individually on
sales, we can perform three separate simple linear regressions. Re-
sults are shown in Tables 3.1 and 3.3. There is evidence of an ex-
tremely strong association between TV and sales and between radio
and sales. There is evidence of a mild association between newspaper
and sales, when the values of TV and radio are ignored.
5. How accurately can we predict future sales?
The response can be predicted using (3.21). The accuracy associ-
ated with this estimate depends on whether we wish to predict an
individual response, Y = f(X) + ϵ, or the average response, f(X)
(Section 3.2.2). If the former, we use a prediction interval, and if
the latter, we use a confidence interval. Prediction intervals will al-
ways be wider than confidence intervals because they account for the
uncertainty associated with ϵ, the irreducible error.
6. Is the relationship linear?
In Section 3.3.3, we saw that residual plots can be used in order to
identify non-linearity. If the relationships are linear, then the residual
plots should display no pattern. In the case of the Advertising data,
we observe a non-linear effect in Figure 3.5, though this effect could
also be observed in a residual plot. In Section 3.3.2, we discussed the
inclusion of transformations of the predictors in the linear regression
model in order to accommodate non-linear relationships.
7. Is there synergy among the advertising media?
The standard linear regression model assumes an additive relation-
ship between the predictors and the response. An additive model
is easy to interpret because the association between each predictor
and the response is unrelated to the values of the other predictors.
However, the additive assumption may be unrealistic for certain data
sets. In Section 3.3.2, we showed how to include an interaction term
