112
3. Linear Regression
y
y
x1
x1
x2
x2
y
y
y
FIGURE 3.16.
Plots of ˆf(X) using KNN regression on a two-dimensional
data set with 64 observations (orange dots). Left: K = 1 results in a rough step
function fit. Right: K = 9 produces a much smoother fit.
In contrast, larger values of K provide a smoother and less variable fit; the
prediction in a region is an average of several points, and so changing one
observation has a smaller effect. However, the smoothing may cause bias by
masking some of the structure in f(X). In Chapter 5, we introduce several
approaches for estimating test error rates. These methods can be used to
identify the optimal value of K in KNN regression.
In what setting will a parametric approach such as least squares linear re-
gression outperform a non-parametric approach such as KNN regression?
The answer is simple: the parametric approach will outperform the non-
parametric approach if the parametric form that has been selected is close
to the true form of f. Figure 3.17 provides an example with data generated
from a one-dimensional linear regression model. The black solid lines rep-
resent f(X), while the blue curves correspond to the KNN fits using K = 1
and K = 9. In this case, the K = 1 predictions are far too variable, while
the smoother K = 9 fit is much closer to f(X). However, since the true
relationship is linear, it is hard for a non-parametric approach to compete
with linear regression: a non-parametric approach incurs a cost in variance
that is not offset by a reduction in bias. The blue dashed line in the left-
hand panel of Figure 3.18 represents the linear regression fit to the same
data. It is almost perfect. The right-hand panel of Figure 3.18 reveals that
linear regression outperforms KNN for this data. The green solid line, plot-
ted as a function of 1/K, represents the test set mean squared error (MSE)
for KNN. The KNN errors are well above the black dashed line, which is
the test MSE for linear regression. When the value of K is large, then KNN
performs only a little worse than least squares regression in terms of MSE.
It performs far worse when K is small.
In practice, the true relationship between X and Y is rarely exactly lin-
ear. Figure 3.19 examines the relative performances of least squares regres-
sion and KNN under increasing levels of non-linearity in the relationship
between X and Y . In the top row, the true relationship is nearly linear.
In this case we see that the test MSE for linear regression is still superior
