4.7 Lab: Logistic Regression, LDA, QDA, and KNN
173
applies a transformation to E(Y |X1, . . . , Xp) so that the transformed mean
is a linear function of the predictors. That is,
η(E(Y |X1, . . . , Xp)) = β0 + β1X1 + · · · + βpXp.
(4.42)
The link functions for linear, logistic and Poisson regression are η(µ) = µ,
η(µ) = log(µ/(1 −µ)), and η(µ) = log(µ), respectively.
The Gaussian, Bernoulli and Poisson distributions are all members of a
wider class of distributions, known as the exponential family. Other well- exponential
family
known members of this family are the exponential distribution, the Gamma
exponential
Gamma
distribution, and the negative binomial distribution. In general, we can per-
negative
binomial
form a regression by modeling the response Y as coming from a particular
member of the exponential family, and then transforming the mean of the
response so that the transformed mean is a linear function of the predictors
via (4.42). Any regression approach that follows this very general recipe is
known as a generalized linear model (GLM). Thus, linear regression, logistic generalized
linear model
regression, and Poisson regression are three examples of GLMs. Other ex-
amples not covered here include Gamma regression and negative binomial
regression.
4.7
Lab: Logistic Regression, LDA, QDA, and
KNN
4.7.1
The Stock Market Data
In this lab we will examine the Smarket data, which is part of the ISLP
library. This data set consists of percentage returns for the S&P 500 stock
index over 1,250 days, from the beginning of 2001 until the end of 2005.
For each date, we have recorded the percentage returns for each of the five
previous trading days, Lag1 through Lag5. We have also recorded Volume
(the number of shares traded on the previous day, in billions), Today (the
percentage return on the date in question) and Direction (whether the
market was Up or Down on this date).
We start by importing our libraries at this top level; these are all imports
we have seen in previous labs.
In [1]: import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from matplotlib.pyplot import subplots
import statsmodels.api as sm
from ISLP import load_data
from ISLP.models import (ModelSpec as MS,
summarize)
We also collect together the new imports needed for this lab.
In [2]: from ISLP import confusion_table
from ISLP.models import contrast
from sklearn.discriminant_analysis import \
(LinearDiscriminantAnalysis as LDA,
QuadraticDiscriminantAnalysis as QDA)
from sklearn.naive_bayes import GaussianNB
from sklearn.neighbors import KNeighborsClassifier
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
