140
4. Classification
low balances we now predict the probability of default as close to, but never
below, zero. Likewise, for high balances we predict a default probability
close to, but never above, one. The logistic function will always produce
an S-shaped curve of this form, and so regardless of the value of X, we
will obtain a sensible prediction. We also see that the logistic model is
better able to capture the range of probabilities than is the linear regression
model in the left-hand plot. The average fitted probability in both cases is
0.0333 (averaged over the training data), which is the same as the overall
proportion of defaulters in the data set.
After a bit of manipulation of (4.2), we find that
p(X)
1 −p(X) = eβ0+β1X.
(4.3)
The quantity p(X)/[1−p(X)] is called the odds, and can take on any value odds
between 0 and ∞. Values of the odds close to 0 and ∞indicate very low
and very high probabilities of default, respectively. For example, on average
1 in 5 people with an odds of 1/4 will default, since p(X) = 0.2 implies an
odds of
0.2
1−0.2 = 1/4. Likewise, on average nine out of every ten people with
an odds of 9 will default, since p(X) = 0.9 implies an odds of
0.9
1−0.9 = 9.
Odds are traditionally used instead of probabilities in horse-racing, since
they relate more naturally to the correct betting strategy.
By taking the logarithm of both sides of (4.3), we arrive at
log
*
p(X)
1 −p(X)
+
= β0 + β1X.
(4.4)
The left-hand side is called the log odds or logit. We see that the logistic log odds
logit
regression model (4.2) has a logit that is linear in X.
Recall from Chapter 3 that in a linear regression model, β1 gives the
average change in Y associated with a one-unit increase in X. By contrast,
in a logistic regression model, increasing X by one unit changes the log
odds by β1 (4.4). Equivalently, it multiplies the odds by eβ1 (4.3). However,
because the relationship between p(X) and X in (4.2) is not a straight line,
β1 does not correspond to the change in p(X) associated with a one-unit
increase in X. The amount that p(X) changes due to a one-unit change in
X depends on the current value of X. But regardless of the value of X, if
β1 is positive then increasing X will be associated with increasing p(X),
and if β1 is negative then increasing X will be associated with decreasing
p(X). The fact that there is not a straight-line relationship between p(X)
and X, and the fact that the rate of change in p(X) per unit change in X
depends on the current value of X, can also be seen by inspection of the
right-hand panel of Figure 4.2.
4.3.2
Estimating the Regression Coefficients
The coefficients β0 and β1 in (4.2) are unknown, and must be estimated
based on the available training data. In Chapter 3, we used the least squares
approach to estimate the unknown linear regression coefficients. Although
we could use (non-linear) least squares to fit the model (4.4), the more
general method of maximum likelihood is preferred, since it has better sta-
tistical properties. The basic intuition behind using maximum likelihood
