6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods
261
20
30
40
50
60
5
10
15
20
25
30
Population
Ad Spending
FIGURE 6.21.
For the advertising data, the first PLS direction (solid line)
and first PCR direction (dotted line) are shown.
that the directions that best explain the predictors will also be the best
directions to use for predicting the response. Unsupervised methods are
discussed further in Chapter 12.
We now present partial least squares (PLS), a supervised alternative to partial least
squares
PCR. Like PCR, PLS is a dimension reduction method, which first identifies
a new set of features Z1, . . . , ZM that are linear combinations of the original
features, and then fits a linear model via least squares using these M new
features. But unlike PCR, PLS identifies these new features in a supervised
way—that is, it makes use of the response Y in order to identify new
features that not only approximate the old features well, but also that are
related to the response. Roughly speaking, the PLS approach attempts to
find directions that help explain both the response and the predictors.
We now describe how the first PLS direction is computed. After stan-
dardizing the p predictors, PLS computes the first direction Z1 by setting
each φj1 in (6.16) equal to the coefficient from the simple linear regression
of Y onto Xj. One can show that this coefficient is proportional to the cor-
relation between Y and Xj. Hence, in computing Z1 = )p
j=1 φj1Xj, PLS
places the highest weight on the variables that are most strongly related to
the response.
Figure 6.21 displays an example of PLS on a synthetic dataset with Sales
in each of 100 regions as the response, and two predictors; Population Size
and Advertising Spending. The solid green line indicates the first PLS di-
rection, while the dotted line shows the first principal component direction.
PLS has chosen a direction that has less change in the ad dimension per
unit change in the pop dimension, relative to PCA. This suggests that pop
is more highly correlated with the response than is ad. The PLS direction
does not fit the predictors as closely as does PCA, but it does a better job
explaining the response.
To identify the second PLS direction we first adjust each of the variables
for Z1, by regressing each variable on Z1 and taking residuals. These resid-
uals can be interpreted as the remaining information that has not been
explained by the first PLS direction. We then compute Z2 using this or-
