6.1 Subset Selection
231
6.1
Subset Selection
In this section we consider some methods for selecting subsets of predictors.
These include best subset and stepwise model selection procedures.
6.1.1
Best Subset Selection
To perform best subset selection, we fit a separate least squares regression best subset
selection
for each possible combination of the p predictors. That is, we fit all p models
that contain exactly one predictor, all
'p
2
(
= p(p−1)/2 models that contain
exactly two predictors, and so forth. We then look at all of the resulting
models, with the goal of identifying the one that is best.
The problem of selecting the best model from among the 2p possibilities
considered by best subset selection is not trivial. This is usually broken up
into two stages, as described in Algorithm 6.1.
Algorithm 6.1 Best subset selection
1. Let M0 denote the null model, which contains no predictors. This
model simply predicts the sample mean for each observation.
2. For k = 1, 2, . . . p:
(a) Fit all
'p
k
(
models that contain exactly k predictors.
(b) Pick the best among these
'p
k
(
models, and call it Mk. Here best
is defined as having the smallest RSS, or equivalently largest R2.
3. Select a single best model from among M0, . . . , Mp using using the
prediction error on a validation set, Cp (AIC), BIC, or adjusted R2.
Or use the cross-validation method.
In Algorithm 6.1, Step 2 identifies the best model (on the training data)
for each subset size, in order to reduce the problem from one of 2p possible
models to one of p + 1 possible models. In Figure 6.1, these models form
the lower frontier depicted in red.
Now in order to select a single best model, we must simply choose among
these p + 1 options. This task must be performed with care, because the
RSS of these p + 1 models decreases monotonically, and the R2 increases
monotonically, as the number of features included in the models increases.
Therefore, if we use these statistics to select the best model, then we will
always end up with a model involving all of the variables. The problem is
that a low RSS or a high R2 indicates a model with a low training error,
whereas we wish to choose a model that has a low test error. (As shown in
Chapter 2 in Figures 2.9–2.11, training error tends to be quite a bit smaller
than test error, and a low training error by no means guarantees a low test
error.) Therefore, in Step 3, we use the error on a validation set, Cp, BIC, or
adjusted R2 in order to select among M0, M1, . . . , Mp. If cross-validation
is used to select the best model, then Step 2 is repeated on each training
fold, and the validation errors are averaged to select the best value of k.
