230
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
many solutions. Each of these least squares solutions gives zero error
on the training data, but typically very poor test set performance
due to extremely high variance.1 By constraining or shrinking the
estimated coefficients, we can often substantially reduce the variance
at the cost of a negligible increase in bias. This can lead to substantial
improvements in the accuracy with which we can predict the response
for observations not used in model training.
• Model Interpretability: It is often the case that some or many of the
variables used in a multiple regression model are in fact not associ-
ated with the response. Including such irrelevant variables leads to
unnecessary complexity in the resulting model. By removing these
variables—that is, by setting the corresponding coefficient estimates
to zero—we can obtain a model that is more easily interpreted. Now
least squares is extremely unlikely to yield any coefficient estimates
that are exactly zero. In this chapter, we see some approaches for au-
tomatically performing feature selection or variable selection—that is, feature
selection
variable
selection
for excluding irrelevant variables from a multiple regression model.
There are many alternatives, both classical and modern, to using least
squares to fit (6.1). In this chapter, we discuss three important classes of
methods.
• Subset Selection. This approach involves identifying a subset of the p
predictors that we believe to be related to the response. We then fit
a model using least squares on the reduced set of variables.
• Shrinkage. This approach involves fitting a model involving all p pre-
dictors. However, the estimated coefficients are shrunken towards zero
relative to the least squares estimates. This shrinkage (also known as
regularization) has the effect of reducing variance. Depending on what
type of shrinkage is performed, some of the coefficients may be esti-
mated to be exactly zero. Hence, shrinkage methods can also perform
variable selection.
• Dimension Reduction. This approach involves projecting the p predic-
tors into an M-dimensional subspace, where M < p. This is achieved
by computing M different linear combinations, or projections, of the
variables. Then these M projections are used as predictors to fit a
linear regression model by least squares.
In the following sections we describe each of these approaches in greater de-
tail, along with their advantages and disadvantages. Although this chapter
describes extensions and modifications to the linear model for regression
seen in Chapter 3, the same concepts apply to other methods, such as the
classification models seen in Chapter 4.
1When p ≫n, the least squares solution that has the smallest sum of squared coeffi-
cients can sometimes perform quite well. See Section 10.8 for a more detailed discussion.
