242
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
The right-hand panel of Figure 6.4 displays the same ridge coefficient
estimates as the left-hand panel, but instead of displaying λ on the x-axis,
we now display ∥ˆβR
λ ∥2/∥ˆβ∥2, where ˆβ denotes the vector of least squares
coefficient estimates. The notation ∥β∥2 denotes the ℓ2 norm (pronounced ℓ2 norm
“ell 2”) of a vector, and is defined as ∥β∥2 =
G)p
j=1 βj
2. It measures the
distance of β from zero. As λ increases, the ℓ2 norm of ˆβR
λ will always
decrease, and so will ∥ˆβR
λ ∥2/∥ˆβ∥2. The latter quantity ranges from 1 (when
λ = 0, in which case the ridge regression coefficient estimate is the same
as the least squares estimate, and so their ℓ2 norms are the same) to 0
(when λ = ∞, in which case the ridge regression coefficient estimate is a
vector of zeros, with ℓ2 norm equal to zero). Therefore, we can think of the
x-axis in the right-hand panel of Figure 6.4 as the amount that the ridge
regression coefficient estimates have been shrunken towards zero; a small
value indicates that they have been shrunken very close to zero.
The standard least squares coefficient estimates discussed in Chapter 3
are scale equivariant: multiplying Xj by a constant c simply leads to a scale
equivariant
scaling of the least squares coefficient estimates by a factor of 1/c. In other
words, regardless of how the jth predictor is scaled, Xj ˆβj will remain the
same. In contrast, the ridge regression coefficient estimates can change sub-
stantially when multiplying a given predictor by a constant. For instance,
consider the income variable, which is measured in dollars. One could rea-
sonably have measured income in thousands of dollars, which would result
in a reduction in the observed values of income by a factor of 1,000. Now due
to the sum of squared coefficients term in the ridge regression formulation
(6.5), such a change in scale will not simply cause the ridge regression co-
efficient estimate for income to change by a factor of 1,000. In other words,
Xj ˆβR
j,λ will depend not only on the value of λ, but also on the scaling of the
jth predictor. In fact, the value of Xj ˆβR
j,λ may even depend on the scaling
of the other predictors! Therefore, it is best to apply ridge regression after
standardizing the predictors, using the formula
˜xij =
xij
G
1
n
)n
i=1(xij −xj)2
,
(6.6)
so that they are all on the same scale. In (6.6), the denominator is the
estimated standard deviation of the jth predictor. Consequently, all of the
standardized predictors will have a standard deviation of one. As a re-
sult the final fit will not depend on the scale on which the predictors are
measured. In Figure 6.4, the y-axis displays the standardized ridge regres-
sion coefficient estimates—that is, the coefficient estimates that result from
performing ridge regression using standardized predictors.
Why Does Ridge Regression Improve Over Least Squares?
Ridge regression’s advantage over least squares is rooted in the bias-variance
trade-off. As λ increases, the flexibility of the ridge regression fit decreases,
leading to decreased variance but increased bias. This is illustrated in the
left-hand panel of Figure 6.5, using a simulated data set containing p = 45
predictors and n = 50 observations. The green curve in the left-hand panel
