6.6 Exercises
283
6.6
Exercises
Conceptual
1. We perform best subset, forward stepwise, and backward stepwise
selection on a single data set. For each approach, we obtain p + 1
models, containing 0, 1, 2, . . . , p predictors. Explain your answers:
(a) Which of the three models with k predictors has the smallest
training RSS?
(b) Which of the three models with k predictors has the smallest
test RSS?
(c) True or False:
i. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by forward
stepwise are a subset of the predictors in the (k+1)-variable
model identified by forward stepwise selection.
ii. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by back-
ward stepwise are a subset of the predictors in the (k + 1)-
variable model identified by backward stepwise selection.
iii. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by back-
ward stepwise are a subset of the predictors in the (k + 1)-
variable model identified by forward stepwise selection.
iv. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by forward
stepwise are a subset of the predictors in the (k+1)-variable
model identified by backward stepwise selection.
v. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by best
subset are a subset of the predictors in the (k + 1)-variable
model identified by best subset selection.
2. For parts (a) through (c), indicate which of i. through iv. is correct.
Justify your answer.
(a) The lasso, relative to least squares, is:
i. More flexible and hence will give improved prediction ac-
curacy when its increase in bias is less than its decrease in
variance.
ii. More flexible and hence will give improved prediction accu-
racy when its increase in variance is less than its decrease
in bias.
iii. Less flexible and hence will give improved prediction accu-
racy when its increase in bias is less than its decrease in
variance.
iv. Less flexible and hence will give improved prediction accu-
racy when its increase in variance is less than its decrease
in bias.
(b) Repeat (a) for ridge regression relative to least squares.
(c) Repeat (a) for non-linear methods relative to least squares.
