5.4 Exercises
225
repeatedly create bootstrap samples, and each time we record
whether or not the fifth observation is contained in the bootstrap
sample.
rng = np.random.default_rng(10)
store = np.empty(10000)
for i in range(10000):
store[i] = np.sum(rng.choice(100, replace=True) == 4)
> 0
np.mean(store)
Comment on the results obtained.
3. We now review k-fold cross-validation.
(a) Explain how k-fold cross-validation is implemented.
(b) What are the advantages and disadvantages of k-fold cross-
validation relative to:
i. The validation set approach?
ii. LOOCV?
4. Suppose that we use some statistical learning method to make a pre-
diction for the response Y for a particular value of the predictor X.
Carefully describe how we might estimate the standard deviation of
our prediction.
Applied
5. In Chapter 4, we used logistic regression to predict the probability of
default using income and balance on the Default data set. We will
now estimate the test error of this logistic regression model using the
validation set approach. Do not forget to set a random seed before
beginning your analysis.
(a) Fit a logistic regression model that uses income and balance to
predict default.
(b) Using the validation set approach, estimate the test error of this
model. In order to do this, you must perform the following steps:
i. Split the sample set into a training set and a validation set.
ii. Fit a multiple logistic regression model using only the train-
ing observations.
iii. Obtain a prediction of default status for each individual in
the validation set by computing the posterior probability of
default for that individual, and classifying the individual to
the default category if the posterior probability is greater
than 0.5.
iv. Compute the validation set error, which is the fraction of
the observations in the validation set that are misclassified.
(c) Repeat the process in (b) three times, using three different splits
of the observations into a training set and a validation set. Com-
ment on the results obtained.
