232
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
2
4
6
8
10
2e+07
4e+07
6e+07
8e+07
Number of Predictors
Residual Sum of Squares
2
4
6
8
10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Number of Predictors
R2
FIGURE 6.1. For each possible model containing a subset of the ten predictors
in the Credit data set, the RSS and R2 are displayed. The red frontier tracks the
best model for a given number of predictors, according to RSS and R2. Though
the data set contains only ten predictors, the x-axis ranges from 1 to 11, since one
of the variables is categorical and takes on three values, leading to the creation of
two dummy variables.
Then the model Mk fit on the full training set is delivered for the chosen
k. These approaches are discussed in Section 6.1.3.
An application of best subset selection is shown in Figure 6.1. Each
plotted point corresponds to a least squares regression model fit using a
different subset of the 10 predictors in the Credit data set, discussed in
Chapter 3. Here the variable region is a three-level qualitative variable,
and so is represented by two dummy variables, which are selected sepa-
rately in this case. Hence, there are a total of 11 possible variables which
can be included in the model. We have plotted the RSS and R2 statistics
for each model, as a function of the number of variables. The red curves
connect the best models for each model size, according to RSS or R2. The
figure shows that, as expected, these quantities improve as the number of
variables increases; however, from the three-variable model on, there is little
improvement in RSS and R2 as a result of including additional predictors.
Although we have presented best subset selection here for least squares
regression, the same ideas apply to other types of models, such as logistic
regression. In the case of logistic regression, instead of ordering models by
RSS in Step 2 of Algorithm 6.1, we instead use the deviance, a measure deviance
that plays the role of RSS for a broader class of models. The deviance is
negative two times the maximized log-likelihood; the smaller the deviance,
the better the fit.
While best subset selection is a simple and conceptually appealing ap-
proach, it suffers from computational limitations. The number of possible
models that must be considered grows rapidly as p increases. In general,
there are 2p models that involve subsets of p predictors. So if p = 10,
then there are approximately 1,000 possible models to be considered, and if
p = 20, then there are over one million possibilities! Consequently, best sub-
set selection becomes computationally infeasible for values of p greater than
