244
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
large decrease in variance. Hence, ridge regression works best in situations
where the least squares estimates have high variance.
Ridge regression also has substantial computational advantages over best
subset selection, which requires searching through 2p models. As we dis-
cussed previously, even for moderate values of p, such a search can be
computationally infeasible. In contrast, for any fixed value of λ, ridge re-
gression only fits a single model, and the model-fitting procedure can be
performed quite quickly. In fact, one can show that the computations re-
quired to solve (6.5), simultaneously for all values of λ, are almost identical
to those for fitting a model using least squares.
6.2.2
The Lasso
Ridge regression does have one obvious disadvantage. Unlike best subset,
forward stepwise, and backward stepwise selection, which will generally
select models that involve just a subset of the variables, ridge regression
will include all p predictors in the final model. The penalty λ ) β2
j in (6.5)
will shrink all of the coefficients towards zero, but it will not set any of them
exactly to zero (unless λ = ∞). This may not be a problem for prediction
accuracy, but it can create a challenge in model interpretation in settings in
which the number of variables p is quite large. For example, in the Credit
data set, it appears that the most important variables are income, limit,
rating, and student. So we might wish to build a model including just
these predictors. However, ridge regression will always generate a model
involving all ten predictors. Increasing the value of λ will tend to reduce
the magnitudes of the coefficients, but will not result in exclusion of any of
the variables.
The lasso is a relatively recent alternative to ridge regression that over- lasso
comes this disadvantage. The lasso coefficients, ˆβL
λ , minimize the quantity
n
0
i=1

yi −β0 −
p
0
j=1
βjxij


2
+ λ
p
0
j=1
|βj| = RSS + λ
p
0
j=1
|βj|.
(6.7)
Comparing (6.7) to (6.5), we see that the lasso and ridge regression have
similar formulations. The only difference is that the β2
j term in the ridge
regression penalty (6.5) has been replaced by |βj| in the lasso penalty (6.7).
In statistical parlance, the lasso uses an ℓ1 (pronounced “ell 1”) penalty
instead of an ℓ2 penalty. The ℓ1 norm of a coefficient vector β is given by
∥β∥1 = ) |βj|.
As with ridge regression, the lasso shrinks the coefficient estimates to-
wards zero. However, in the case of the lasso, the ℓ1 penalty has the effect
of forcing some of the coefficient estimates to be exactly equal to zero when
the tuning parameter λ is sufficiently large. Hence, much like best subset se-
lection, the lasso performs variable selection. As a result, models generated
from the lasso are generally much easier to interpret than those produced
by ridge regression. We say that the lasso yields sparse models—that is, sparse
models that involve only a subset of the variables. As in ridge regression,
selecting a good value of λ for the lasso is critical; we defer this discussion
to Section 6.2.3, where we use cross-validation.
