212
5. Resampling Methods
5.2
The Bootstrap
The bootstrap is a widely applicable and extremely powerful statistical tool bootstrap
that can be used to quantify the uncertainty associated with a given esti-
mator or statistical learning method. As a simple example, the bootstrap
can be used to estimate the standard errors of the coefficients from a linear
regression fit. In the specific case of linear regression, this is not particularly
useful, since we saw in Chapter 3 that standard statistical software such as
R outputs such standard errors automatically. However, the power of the
bootstrap lies in the fact that it can be easily applied to a wide range of
statistical learning methods, including some for which a measure of vari-
ability is otherwise difficult to obtain and is not automatically output by
statistical software.
In this section we illustrate the bootstrap on a toy example in which we
wish to determine the best investment allocation under a simple model.
In Section 5.3 we explore the use of the bootstrap to assess the variability
associated with the regression coefficients in a linear model fit.
Suppose that we wish to invest a fixed sum of money in two financial
assets that yield returns of X and Y , respectively, where X and Y are
random quantities. We will invest a fraction α of our money in X, and will
invest the remaining 1 −α in Y . Since there is variability associated with
the returns on these two assets, we wish to choose α to minimize the total
risk, or variance, of our investment. In other words, we want to minimize
Var(αX + (1 −α)Y ). One can show that the value that minimizes the risk
is given by
α =
σ2
Y −σXY
σ2
X + σ2
Y −2σXY
,
(5.6)
where σ2
X = Var(X), σ2
Y = Var(Y ), and σXY = Cov(X, Y ).
In reality, the quantities σ2
X, σ2
Y , and σXY are unknown. We can compute
estimates for these quantities, ˆσ2
X, ˆσ2
Y , and ˆσXY , using a data set that
contains past measurements for X and Y . We can then estimate the value
of α that minimizes the variance of our investment using
ˆα =
ˆσ2
Y −ˆσXY
ˆσ2
X + ˆσ2
Y −2ˆσXY
.
(5.7)
Figure 5.9 illustrates this approach for estimating α on a simulated data
set. In each panel, we simulated 100 pairs of returns for the investments
X and Y . We used these returns to estimate σ2
X, σ2
Y , and σXY , which we
then substituted into (5.7) in order to obtain estimates for α. The value of
ˆα resulting from each simulated data set ranges from 0.532 to 0.657.
It is natural to wish to quantify the accuracy of our estimate of α. To
estimate the standard deviation of ˆα, we repeated the process of simu-
lating 100 paired observations of X and Y , and estimating α using (5.7),
1,000 times. We thereby obtained 1,000 estimates for α, which we can call
ˆα1, ˆα2, . . . , ˆα1,000. The left-hand panel of Figure 5.10 displays a histogram
of the resulting estimates. For these simulations the parameters were set to
σ2
X = 1, σ2
Y = 1.25, and σXY = 0.5, and so we know that the true value of
α is 0.6. We indicated this value using a solid vertical line on the histogram.
