7
Moving Beyond Linearity
So far in this book, we have mostly focused on linear models. Linear models
are relatively simple to describe and implement, and have advantages over
other approaches in terms of interpretation and inference. However, stan-
dard linear regression can have significant limitations in terms of predic-
tive power. This is because the linearity assumption is almost always an
approximation, and sometimes a poor one. In Chapter 6 we see that we can
improve upon least squares using ridge regression, the lasso, principal com-
ponents regression, and other techniques. In that setting, the improvement
is obtained by reducing the complexity of the linear model, and hence the
variance of the estimates. But we are still using a linear model, which can
only be improved so far! In this chapter we relax the linearity assumption
while still attempting to maintain as much interpretability as possible. We
do this by examining very simple extensions of linear models like polyno-
mial regression and step functions, as well as more sophisticated approaches
such as splines, local regression, and generalized additive models.
• Polynomial regression extends the linear model by adding extra pre-
dictors, obtained by raising each of the original predictors to a power.
For example, a cubic regression uses three variables, X, X2, and X3,
as predictors. This approach provides a simple way to provide a non-
linear fit to data.
• Step functions cut the range of a variable into K distinct regions in
order to produce a qualitative variable. This has the effect of fitting
a piecewise constant function.
• Regression splines are more flexible than polynomials and step func-
tions, and in fact are an extension of the two. They involve dividing
the range of X into K distinct regions. Within each region, a poly-
nomial function is fit to the data. However, these polynomials are
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_7
289
