5.1 Cross-Validation
211
2
4
6
8
10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
Order of Polynomials Used
Error Rate
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.50
1.00
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
1/K
Error Rate
FIGURE 5.8. Test error (brown), training error (blue), and 10-fold CV error
(black) on the two-dimensional classification data displayed in Figure 5.7. Left:
Logistic regression using polynomial functions of the predictors. The order of
the polynomials used is displayed on the x-axis. Right: The KNN classifier with
different values of K, the number of neighbors used in the KNN classifier.
of Figure 5.7, in which we have fit a logistic regression model involving
cubic polynomials of the predictors. Now the test error rate has decreased
to 0.160. Going to a quartic polynomial (bottom-right) slightly increases
the test error.
In practice, for real data, the Bayes decision boundary and the test er-
ror rates are unknown. So how might we decide between the four logistic
regression models displayed in Figure 5.7? We can use cross-validation in
order to make this decision. The left-hand panel of Figure 5.8 displays in
black the 10-fold CV error rates that result from fitting ten logistic regres-
sion models to the data, using polynomial functions of the predictors up
to tenth order. The true test errors are shown in brown, and the training
errors are shown in blue. As we have seen previously, the training error
tends to decrease as the flexibility of the fit increases. (The figure indicates
that though the training error rate doesn’t quite decrease monotonically,
it tends to decrease on the whole as the model complexity increases.) In
contrast, the test error displays a characteristic U-shape. The 10-fold CV
error rate provides a pretty good approximation to the test error rate.
While it somewhat underestimates the error rate, it reaches a minimum
when fourth-order polynomials are used, which is very close to the min-
imum of the test curve, which occurs when third-order polynomials are
used. In fact, using fourth-order polynomials would likely lead to good test
set performance, as the true test error rate is approximately the same for
third, fourth, fifth, and sixth-order polynomials.
The right-hand panel of Figure 5.8 displays the same three curves us-
ing the KNN approach for classification, as a function of the value of K
(which in this context indicates the number of neighbors used in the KNN
classifier, rather than the number of CV folds used). Again the training
error rate declines as the method becomes more flexible, and so we see that
the training error rate cannot be used to select the optimal value for K.
Though the cross-validation error curve slightly underestimates the test
error rate, it takes on a minimum very close to the best value for K.
