226
5. Resampling Methods
(d) Now consider a logistic regression model that predicts the prob-
ability of default using income, balance, and a dummy variable
for student. Estimate the test error for this model using the val-
idation set approach. Comment on whether or not including a
dummy variable for student leads to a reduction in the test error
rate.
6. We continue to consider the use of a logistic regression model to
predict the probability of default using income and balance on the
Default data set. In particular, we will now compute estimates for the
standard errors of the income and balance logistic regression coeffi-
cients in two different ways: (1) using the bootstrap, and (2) using the
standard formula for computing the standard errors in the sm.GLM()
function. Do not forget to set a random seed before beginning your
analysis.
(a) Using the summarize() and sm.GLM() functions, determine the
estimated standard errors for the coefficients associated with
income and balance in a multiple logistic regression model that
uses both predictors.
(b) Write a function, boot_fn(), that takes as input the Default data
set as well as an index of the observations, and that outputs
the coefficient estimates for income and balance in the multiple
logistic regression model.
(c) Following the bootstrap example in the lab, use your boot_fn()
function to estimate the standard errors of the logistic regression
coefficients for income and balance.
(d) Comment on the estimated standard errors obtained using the
sm.GLM() function and using the bootstrap.
7. In Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3, we saw that the cross_validate() function
can be used in order to compute the LOOCV test error estimate.
Alternatively, one could compute those quantities using just sm.GLM()
and the predict() method of the fitted model within a for loop. You
will now take this approach in order to compute the LOOCV error
for a simple logistic regression model on the Weekly data set. Recall
that in the context of classification problems, the LOOCV error is
given in (5.4).
(a) Fit a logistic regression model that predicts Direction using Lag1
and Lag2.
(b) Fit a logistic regression model that predicts Direction using Lag1
and Lag2 using all but the first observation.
(c) Use the model from (b) to predict the direction of the first obser-
vation. You can do this by predicting that the first observation
will go up if P(Direction = "Up"|Lag1, Lag2) > 0.5. Was this
observation correctly classified?
(d) Write a for loop from i = 1 to i = n, where n is the number of
observations in the data set, that performs each of the following
steps:
