238
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
the BIC statistic generally places a heavier penalty on models with many
variables, and hence results in the selection of smaller models than Cp.
In Figure 6.2, we see that this is indeed the case for the Credit data set;
BIC chooses a model that contains only the four predictors income, limit,
cards, and student. In this case the curves are very flat and so there does
not appear to be much difference in accuracy between the four-variable and
six-variable models.
The adjusted R2 statistic is another popular approach for selecting among
a set of models that contain different numbers of variables. Recall from
Chapter 3 that the usual R2 is defined as 1 −RSS/TSS, where TSS =
)(yi −y)2 is the total sum of squares for the response. Since RSS always
decreases as more variables are added to the model, the R2 always increases
as more variables are added. For a least squares model with d variables,
the adjusted R2 statistic is calculated as
Adjusted R2 = 1 −RSS/(n −d −1)
TSS/(n −1)
.
(6.4)
Unlike Cp, AIC, and BIC, for which a small value indicates a model with
a low test error, a large value of adjusted R2 indicates a model with a
small test error. Maximizing the adjusted R2 is equivalent to minimizing
RSS
n−d−1. While RSS always decreases as the number of variables in the model
increases,
RSS
n−d−1 may increase or decrease, due to the presence of d in the
denominator.
The intuition behind the adjusted R2 is that once all of the correct
variables have been included in the model, adding additional noise variables
will lead to only a very small decrease in RSS. Since adding noise variables
leads to an increase in d, such variables will lead to an increase in
RSS
n−d−1,
and consequently a decrease in the adjusted R2. Therefore, in theory, the
model with the largest adjusted R2 will have only correct variables and
no noise variables. Unlike the R2 statistic, the adjusted R2 statistic pays
a price for the inclusion of unnecessary variables in the model. Figure 6.2
displays the adjusted R2 for the Credit data set. Using this statistic results
in the selection of a model that contains seven variables, adding own to the
model selected by Cp and AIC.
Cp, AIC, and BIC all have rigorous theoretical justifications that are
beyond the scope of this book. These justifications rely on asymptotic ar-
guments (scenarios where the sample size n is very large). Despite its pop-
ularity, and even though it is quite intuitive, the adjusted R2 is not as well
motivated in statistical theory as AIC, BIC, and Cp. All of these measures
are simple to use and compute. Here we have presented their formulas in
the case of a linear model fit using least squares; however, AIC and BIC
can also be defined for more general types of models.
Validation and Cross-Validation
As an alternative to the approaches just discussed, we can directly esti-
mate the test error using the validation set and cross-validation methods
discussed in Chapter 5. We can compute the validation set error or the
cross-validation error for each model under consideration, and then select
