202
5. Resampling Methods
5.1
Cross-Validation
In Chapter 2 we discuss the distinction between the test error rate and the
training error rate. The test error is the average error that results from using
a statistical learning method to predict the response on a new observation—
that is, a measurement that was not used in training the method. Given
a data set, the use of a particular statistical learning method is warranted
if it results in a low test error. The test error can be easily calculated if a
designated test set is available. Unfortunately, this is usually not the case.
In contrast, the training error can be easily calculated by applying the
statistical learning method to the observations used in its training. But as
we saw in Chapter 2, the training error rate often is quite different from the
test error rate, and in particular the former can dramatically underestimate
the latter.
In the absence of a very large designated test set that can be used to
directly estimate the test error rate, a number of techniques can be used
to estimate this quantity using the available training data. Some methods
make a mathematical adjustment to the training error rate in order to
estimate the test error rate. Such approaches are discussed in Chapter 6.
In this section, we instead consider a class of methods that estimate the
test error rate by holding out a subset of the training observations from the
fitting process, and then applying the statistical learning method to those
held out observations.
In Sections 5.1.1–5.1.4, for simplicity we assume that we are interested
in performing regression with a quantitative response. In Section 5.1.5 we
consider the case of classification with a qualitative response. As we will
see, the key concepts remain the same regardless of whether the response
is quantitative or qualitative.
5.1.1
The Validation Set Approach
Suppose that we would like to estimate the test error associated with fit-
ting a particular statistical learning method on a set of observations. The
validation set approach, displayed in Figure 5.1, is a very simple strategy validation
set approach
for this task. It involves randomly dividing the available set of observa-
tions into two parts, a training set and a validation set or hold-out set. The validation
set
hold-out set
model is fit on the training set, and the fitted model is used to predict the
responses for the observations in the validation set. The resulting validation
set error rate—typically assessed using MSE in the case of a quantitative
response—provides an estimate of the test error rate.
We illustrate the validation set approach on the Auto data set. Recall from
Chapter 3 that there appears to be a non-linear relationship between mpg
and horsepower, and that a model that predicts mpg using horsepower and
horsepower2 gives better results than a model that uses only a linear term.
It is natural to wonder whether a cubic or higher-order fit might provide
even better results. We answer this question in Chapter 3 by looking at
the p-values associated with a cubic term and higher-order polynomial
terms in a linear regression. But we could also answer this question using
the validation method. We randomly split the 392 observations into two
