6
Linear Model Selection
and Regularization
In the regression setting, the standard linear model
Y = β0 + β1X1 + · · · + βpXp + ϵ
(6.1)
is commonly used to describe the relationship between a response Y and
a set of variables X1, X2, . . . , Xp. We have seen in Chapter 3 that one
typically fits this model using least squares.
In the chapters that follow, we consider some approaches for extending
the linear model framework. In Chapter 7 we generalize (6.1) in order to
accommodate non-linear, but still additive, relationships, while in Chap-
ters 8 and 10 we consider even more general non-linear models. However,
the linear model has distinct advantages in terms of inference and, on real-
world problems, is often surprisingly competitive in relation to non-linear
methods. Hence, before moving to the non-linear world, we discuss in this
chapter some ways in which the simple linear model can be improved, by re-
placing plain least squares fitting with some alternative fitting procedures.
Why might we want to use another fitting procedure instead of least
squares? As we will see, alternative fitting procedures can yield better pre-
diction accuracy and model interpretability.
• Prediction Accuracy: Provided that the true relationship between the
response and the predictors is approximately linear, the least squares
estimates will have low bias. If n ≫p—that is, if n, the number of
observations, is much larger than p, the number of variables—then the
least squares estimates tend to also have low variance, and hence will
perform well on test observations. However, if n is not much larger
than p, then there can be a lot of variability in the least squares fit,
resulting in overfitting and consequently poor predictions on future
observations not used in model training. And if p > n, then there is no
longer a unique least squares coefficient estimate: there are infinitely
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_6 
229
