6.2 Shrinkage Methods
241
1e−02
1e+00
1e+02
1e+04
−300
−100
0
100
200
300
400
Standardized Coefficients
Income
Limit
Rating
Student
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
−300
−100
0
100
200
300
400
Standardized Coefficients
λ
∥ˆβR
λ ∥2/∥ˆβ∥2
FIGURE 6.4. The standardized ridge regression coefficients are displayed for
the Credit data set, as a function of λ and ∥ˆβR
λ ∥2/∥ˆβ∥2.
the relative impact of these two terms on the regression coefficient esti-
mates. When λ = 0, the penalty term has no effect, and ridge regression
will produce the least squares estimates. However, as λ →∞, the impact of
the shrinkage penalty grows, and the ridge regression coefficient estimates
will approach zero. Unlike least squares, which generates only one set of co-
efficient estimates, ridge regression will produce a different set of coefficient
estimates, ˆβR
λ , for each value of λ. Selecting a good value for λ is critical;
we defer this discussion to Section 6.2.3, where we use cross-validation.
Note that in (6.5), the shrinkage penalty is applied to β1, . . . , βp, but
not to the intercept β0. We want to shrink the estimated association of
each variable with the response; however, we do not want to shrink the
intercept, which is simply a measure of the mean value of the response
when xi1 = xi2 = . . . = xip = 0. If we assume that the variables—that is,
the columns of the data matrix X—have been centered to have mean zero
before ridge regression is performed, then the estimated intercept will take
the form ˆβ0 = ¯y = )n
i=1 yi/n.
An Application to the Credit Data
In Figure 6.4, the ridge regression coefficient estimates for the Credit data
set are displayed. In the left-hand panel, each curve corresponds to the
ridge regression coefficient estimate for one of the ten variables, plotted
as a function of λ. For example, the black solid line represents the ridge
regression estimate for the income coefficient, as λ is varied. At the extreme
left-hand side of the plot, λ is essentially zero, and so the corresponding
ridge coefficient estimates are the same as the usual least squares esti-
mates. But as λ increases, the ridge coefficient estimates shrink towards
zero. When λ is extremely large, then all of the ridge coefficient estimates
are basically zero; this corresponds to the null model that contains no pre-
dictors. In this plot, the income, limit, rating, and student variables are
displayed in distinct colors, since these variables tend to have by far the
largest coefficient estimates. While the ridge coefficient estimates tend to
decrease in aggregate as λ increases, individual coefficients, such as rating
and income, may occasionally increase as λ increases.
