5.1 Cross-Validation
209
that LOOCV will give approximately unbiased estimates of the test error,
since each training set contains n−1 observations, which is almost as many
as the number of observations in the full data set. And performing k-fold
CV for, say, k = 5 or k = 10 will lead to an intermediate level of bias,
since each training set contains approximately (k −1)n/k observations—
fewer than in the LOOCV approach, but substantially more than in the
validation set approach. Therefore, from the perspective of bias reduction,
it is clear that LOOCV is to be preferred to k-fold CV.
However, we know that bias is not the only source for concern in an esti-
mating procedure; we must also consider the procedure’s variance. It turns
out that LOOCV has higher variance than does k-fold CV with k < n. Why
is this the case? When we perform LOOCV, we are in effect averaging the
outputs of n fitted models, each of which is trained on an almost identical
set of observations; therefore, these outputs are highly (positively) corre-
lated with each other. In contrast, when we perform k-fold CV with k < n,
we are averaging the outputs of k fitted models that are somewhat less
correlated with each other, since the overlap between the training sets in
each model is smaller. Since the mean of many highly correlated quantities
has higher variance than does the mean of many quantities that are not
as highly correlated, the test error estimate resulting from LOOCV tends
to have higher variance than does the test error estimate resulting from
k-fold CV.
To summarize, there is a bias-variance trade-off associated with the
choice of k in k-fold cross-validation. Typically, given these considerations,
one performs k-fold cross-validation using k = 5 or k = 10, as these values
have been shown empirically to yield test error rate estimates that suffer
neither from excessively high bias nor from very high variance.
5.1.5
Cross-Validation on Classification Problems
In this chapter so far, we have illustrated the use of cross-validation in the
regression setting where the outcome Y is quantitative, and so have used
MSE to quantify test error. But cross-validation can also be a very useful
approach in the classification setting when Y is qualitative. In this setting,
cross-validation works just as described earlier in this chapter, except that
rather than using MSE to quantify test error, we instead use the number
of misclassified observations. For instance, in the classification setting, the
LOOCV error rate takes the form
CV(n) = 1
n
n
0
i=1
Erri,
(5.4)
where Erri = I(yi̸ = ˆyi). The k-fold CV error rate and validation set error
rates are defined analogously.
As an example, we fit various logistic regression models on the two-
dimensional classification data displayed in Figure 2.13. In the top-left
panel of Figure 5.7, the black solid line shows the estimated decision bound-
ary resulting from fitting a standard logistic regression model to this data
set. Since this is simulated data, we can compute the true test error rate,
which takes a value of 0.201 and so is substantially larger than the Bayes
