6.1 Subset Selection
235
efficient alternative to best subset selection. However, unlike forward step-
wise selection, it begins with the full least squares model containing all p
predictors, and then iteratively removes the least useful predictor, one-at-
a-time. Details are given in Algorithm 6.3.
Algorithm 6.3 Backward stepwise selection
1. Let Mp denote the full model, which contains all p predictors.
2. For k = p, p −1, . . . , 1:
(a) Consider all k models that contain all but one of the predictors
in Mk, for a total of k −1 predictors.
(b) Choose the best among these k models, and call it Mk−1. Here
best is defined as having smallest RSS or highest R2.
3. Select a single best model from among M0, . . . , Mp using the pre-
diction error on a validation set, Cp (AIC), BIC, or adjusted R2. Or
use the cross-validation method.
Like forward stepwise selection, the backward selection approach searches
through only 1+p(p+1)/2 models, and so can be applied in settings where
p is too large to apply best subset selection.3 Also like forward stepwise
selection, backward stepwise selection is not guaranteed to yield the best
model containing a subset of the p predictors.
Backward selection requires that the number of samples n is larger than
the number of variables p (so that the full model can be fit). In contrast,
forward stepwise can be used even when n < p, and so is the only viable
subset method when p is very large.
Hybrid Approaches
The best subset, forward stepwise, and backward stepwise selection ap-
proaches generally give similar but not identical models. As another al-
ternative, hybrid versions of forward and backward stepwise selection are
available, in which variables are added to the model sequentially, in analogy
to forward selection. However, after adding each new variable, the method
may also remove any variables that no longer provide an improvement in
the model fit. Such an approach attempts to more closely mimic best sub-
set selection while retaining the computational advantages of forward and
backward stepwise selection.
6.1.3
Choosing the Optimal Model
Best subset selection, forward selection, and backward selection result in
the creation of a set of models, each of which contains a subset of the p
3Like forward stepwise selection, backward stepwise selection performs a guided search
over model space, and so effectively considers substantially more than 1 + p(p + 1)/2
models.
