6.4 Considerations in High Dimensions
263
absent (1), creating a large binary feature vector. Then n ≈1,000
and p is much larger.
Data sets containing more features than observations are often referred
to as high-dimensional. Classical approaches such as least squares linear high-
dimensional
regression are not appropriate in this setting. Many of the issues that arise
in the analysis of high-dimensional data were discussed earlier in this book,
since they apply also when n > p: these include the role of the bias-variance
trade-off and the danger of overfitting. Though these issues are always rele-
vant, they can become particularly important when the number of features
is very large relative to the number of observations.
We have defined the high-dimensional setting as the case where the num-
ber of features p is larger than the number of observations n. But the con-
siderations that we will now discuss certainly also apply if p is slightly
smaller than n, and are best always kept in mind when performing super-
vised learning.
6.4.2
What Goes Wrong in High Dimensions?
In order to illustrate the need for extra care and specialized techniques
for regression and classification when p > n, we begin by examining what
can go wrong if we apply a statistical technique not intended for the high-
dimensional setting. For this purpose, we examine least squares regression.
But the same concepts apply to logistic regression, linear discriminant anal-
ysis, and other classical statistical approaches.
When the number of features p is as large as, or larger than, the number
of observations n, least squares as described in Chapter 3 cannot (or rather,
should not) be performed. The reason is simple: regardless of whether or
not there truly is a relationship between the features and the response,
least squares will yield a set of coefficient estimates that result in a perfect
fit to the data, such that the residuals are zero.
An example is shown in Figure 6.22 with p = 1 feature (plus an intercept)
in two cases: when there are 20 observations, and when there are only
two observations. When there are 20 observations, n > p and the least
squares regression line does not perfectly fit the data; instead, the regression
line seeks to approximate the 20 observations as well as possible. On the
other hand, when there are only two observations, then regardless of the
values of those observations, the regression line will fit the data exactly.
This is problematic because this perfect fit will almost certainly lead to
overfitting of the data. In other words, though it is possible to perfectly fit
the training data in the high-dimensional setting, the resulting linear model
will perform extremely poorly on an independent test set, and therefore
does not constitute a useful model. In fact, we can see that this happened
in Figure 6.22: the least squares line obtained in the right-hand panel will
perform very poorly on a test set comprised of the observations in the left-
hand panel. The problem is simple: when p > n or p ≈n, a simple least
squares regression line is too flexible and hence overfits the data.
Figure 6.23 further illustrates the risk of carelessly applying least squares
when the number of features p is large. Data were simulated with n = 20
observations, and regression was performed with between 1 and 20 features,
