4.8 Exercises
195
(c) In general, as the sample size n increases, do we expect the test
prediction accuracy of QDA relative to LDA to improve, decline,
or be unchanged? Why?
(d) True or False: Even if the Bayes decision boundary for a given
problem is linear, we will probably achieve a superior test er-
ror rate using QDA rather than LDA because QDA is flexible
enough to model a linear decision boundary. Justify your an-
swer.
6. Suppose we collect data for a group of students in a statistics class
with variables X1 = hours studied, X2 = undergrad GPA, and Y =
receive an A. We fit a logistic regression and produce estimated
coefficient, ˆβ0 = −6, ˆβ1 = 0.05, ˆβ2 = 1.
(a) Estimate the probability that a student who studies for 40 h and
has an undergrad GPA of 3.5 gets an A in the class.
(b) How many hours would the student in part (a) need to study to
have a 50 % chance of getting an A in the class?
7. Suppose that we wish to predict whether a given stock will issue a
dividend this year (“Yes” or “No”) based on X, last year’s percent
profit. We examine a large number of companies and discover that the
mean value of X for companies that issued a dividend was ¯X = 10,
while the mean for those that didn’t was ¯X = 0. In addition, the
variance of X for these two sets of companies was ˆσ2 = 36. Finally,
80 % of companies issued dividends. Assuming that X follows a nor-
mal distribution, predict the probability that a company will issue
a dividend this year given that its percentage profit was X = 4 last
year.
Hint: Recall that the density function for a normal random variable
is f(x) =
1
√
2πσ2 e−(x−µ)2/2σ2. You will need to use Bayes’ theorem.
8. Suppose that we take a data set, divide it into equally-sized training
and test sets, and then try out two different classification procedures.
First we use logistic regression and get an error rate of 20 % on the
training data and 30 % on the test data. Next we use 1-nearest neigh-
bors (i.e. K = 1) and get an average error rate (averaged over both
test and training data sets) of 18 %. Based on these results, which
method should we prefer to use for classification of new observations?
Why?
9. This problem has to do with odds.
(a) On average, what fraction of people with an odds of 0.37 of
defaulting on their credit card payment will in fact default?
(b) Suppose that an individual has a 16 % chance of defaulting on
her credit card payment. What are the odds that she will de-
fault?
