6.2 Shrinkage Methods
247
FIGURE 6.7.
Contours of the error and constraint functions for the lasso
(left) and ridge regression (right). The solid blue areas are the constraint regions,
|β1|+|β2| ≤s and β2
1 +β2
2 ≤s, while the red ellipses are the contours of the RSS.
the ellipses expand away from the least squares coefficient estimates, the
RSS increases. Equations (6.8) and (6.9) indicate that the lasso and ridge
regression coefficient estimates are given by the first point at which an
ellipse contacts the constraint region. Since ridge regression has a circular
constraint with no sharp points, this intersection will not generally occur on
an axis, and so the ridge regression coefficient estimates will be exclusively
non-zero. However, the lasso constraint has corners at each of the axes, and
so the ellipse will often intersect the constraint region at an axis. When this
occurs, one of the coefficients will equal zero. In higher dimensions, many of
the coefficient estimates may equal zero simultaneously. In Figure 6.7, the
intersection occurs at β1 = 0, and so the resulting model will only include
β2.
In Figure 6.7, we considered the simple case of p = 2. When p = 3,
then the constraint region for ridge regression becomes a sphere, and the
constraint region for the lasso becomes a polyhedron. When p > 3, the
constraint for ridge regression becomes a hypersphere, and the constraint
for the lasso becomes a polytope. However, the key ideas depicted in Fig-
ure 6.7 still hold. In particular, the lasso leads to feature selection when
p > 2 due to the sharp corners of the polyhedron or polytope.
Comparing the Lasso and Ridge Regression
It is clear that the lasso has a major advantage over ridge regression, in
that it produces simpler and more interpretable models that involve only a
subset of the predictors. However, which method leads to better prediction
accuracy? Figure 6.8 displays the variance, squared bias, and test MSE of
the lasso applied to the same simulated data as in Figure 6.5. Clearly the
lasso leads to qualitatively similar behavior to ridge regression, in that as λ
increases, the variance decreases and the bias increases. In the right-hand
