6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods
267
For instance, suppose that we are trying to predict blood pressure on the
basis of half a million SNPs, and that forward stepwise selection indicates
that 17 of those SNPs lead to a good predictive model on the training data.
It would be incorrect to conclude that these 17 SNPs predict blood pressure
more effectively than the other SNPs not included in the model. There are
likely to be many sets of 17 SNPs that would predict blood pressure just
as well as the selected model. If we were to obtain an independent data set
and perform forward stepwise selection on that data set, we would likely
obtain a model containing a different, and perhaps even non-overlapping,
set of SNPs. This does not detract from the value of the model obtained—
for instance, the model might turn out to be very effective in predicting
blood pressure on an independent set of patients, and might be clinically
useful for physicians. But we must be careful not to overstate the results
obtained, and to make it clear that what we have identified is simply one
of many possible models for predicting blood pressure, and that it must be
further validated on independent data sets.
It is also important to be particularly careful in reporting errors and mea-
sures of model fit in the high-dimensional setting. We have seen that when
p > n, it is easy to obtain a useless model that has zero residuals. There-
fore, one should never use sum of squared errors, p-values, R2 statistics, or
other traditional measures of model fit on the training data as evidence of
a good model fit in the high-dimensional setting. For instance, as we saw
in Figure 6.23, one can easily obtain a model with R2 = 1 when p > n.
Reporting this fact might mislead others into thinking that a statistically
valid and useful model has been obtained, whereas in fact this provides
absolutely no evidence of a compelling model. It is important to instead
report results on an independent test set, or cross-validation errors. For
instance, the MSE or R2 on an independent test set is a valid measure of
model fit, but the MSE on the training set certainly is not.
6.5
Lab: Linear Models and Regularization
Methods
In this lab we implement many of the techniques discussed in this chapter.
We import some of our libraries at this top level.
In [1]: import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from matplotlib.pyplot import subplots
from statsmodels.api import OLS
import sklearn.model_selection as skm
import sklearn.linear_model as skl
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from ISLP import load_data
from ISLP.models import ModelSpec as MS
from functools import partial
We again collect the new imports needed for this lab.
In [2]: from sklearn.pipeline import Pipeline
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
