6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods
257
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
20
30
40
50
60
1st Principal Component
Population
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
1st Principal Component
Ad Spending
FIGURE 6.16. Plots of the first principal component scores zi1 versus pop and
ad. The relationships are strong.
principal component Z2 is a linear combination of the variables that is un-
correlated with Z1, and has largest variance subject to this constraint. The
second principal component direction is illustrated as a dashed blue line in
Figure 6.14. It turns out that the zero correlation condition of Z1 with Z2
is equivalent to the condition that the direction must be perpendicular, or perpen-
dicular
orthogonal, to the first principal component direction. The second principal
orthogonal
component is given by the formula
Z2 = 0.544 × (pop −pop) −0.839 × (ad −ad).
Since the advertising data has two predictors, the first two principal com-
ponents contain all of the information that is in pop and ad. However, by
construction, the first component will contain the most information. Con-
sider, for example, the much larger variability of zi1 (the x-axis) versus
zi2 (the y-axis) in the right-hand panel of Figure 6.15. The fact that the
second principal component scores are much closer to zero indicates that
this component captures far less information. As another illustration, Fig-
ure 6.17 displays zi2 versus pop and ad. There is little relationship between
the second principal component and these two predictors, again suggesting
that in this case, one only needs the first principal component in order to
accurately represent the pop and ad budgets.
With two-dimensional data, such as in our advertising example, we can
construct at most two principal components. However, if we had other
predictors, such as population age, income level, education, and so forth,
then additional components could be constructed. They would successively
maximize variance, subject to the constraint of being uncorrelated with the
preceding components.
The Principal Components Regression Approach
The principal components regression (PCR) approach involves construct- principal
components
regression
ing the first M principal components, Z1, . . . , ZM, and then using these
components as the predictors in a linear regression model that is fit us-
ing least squares. The key idea is that often a small number of principal
components suffice to explain most of the variability in the data, as well
as the relationship with the response. In other words, we assume that the
