260
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
2
4
6
8
10
−300
−100
0
100
200
300
400
Number of Components
Standardized Coefficients
Income
Limit
Rating
Student
2
4
6
8
10
20000
40000
60000
80000
Number of Components
Cross−Validation MSE
FIGURE 6.20. Left: PCR standardized coefficient estimates on the Credit data
set for different values of M. Right: The ten-fold cross-validation MSE obtained
using PCR, as a function of M.
development of a model that relies upon a small set of the original features.
In this sense, PCR is more closely related to ridge regression than to the
lasso. In fact, one can show that PCR and ridge regression are very closely
related. One can even think of ridge regression as a continuous version of
PCR!8
In PCR, the number of principal components, M, is typically chosen by
cross-validation. The results of applying PCR to the Credit data set are
shown in Figure 6.20; the right-hand panel displays the cross-validation er-
rors obtained, as a function of M. On these data, the lowest cross-validation
error occurs when there are M = 10 components; this corresponds to al-
most no dimension reduction at all, since PCR with M = 11 is equivalent
to simply performing least squares.
When performing PCR, we generally recommend standardizing each pre-
dictor, using (6.6), prior to generating the principal components. This stan-
dardization ensures that all variables are on the same scale. In the absence
of standardization, the high-variance variables will tend to play a larger
role in the principal components obtained, and the scale on which the vari-
ables are measured will ultimately have an effect on the final PCR model.
However, if the variables are all measured in the same units (say, kilograms,
or inches), then one might choose not to standardize them.
6.3.2
Partial Least Squares
The PCR approach that we just described involves identifying linear combi-
nations, or directions, that best represent the predictors X1, . . . , Xp. These
directions are identified in an unsupervised way, since the response Y is
not used to help determine the principal component directions. That is,
the response does not supervise the identification of the principal compo-
nents. Consequently, PCR suffers from a drawback: there is no guarantee
8More details can be found in Section 3.5 of The Elements of Statistical Learning by
Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman.
