290
7. Moving Beyond Linearity
constrained so that they join smoothly at the region boundaries, or
knots. Provided that the interval is divided into enough regions, this
can produce an extremely flexible fit.
• Smoothing splines are similar to regression splines, but arise in a
slightly different situation. Smoothing splines result from minimizing
a residual sum of squares criterion subject to a smoothness penalty.
• Local regression is similar to splines, but differs in an important way.
The regions are allowed to overlap, and indeed they do so in a very
smooth way.
• Generalized additive models allow us to extend the methods above to
deal with multiple predictors.
In Sections 7.1–7.6, we present a number of approaches for modeling the
relationship between a response Y and a single predictor X in a flexible
way. In Section 7.7, we show that these approaches can be seamlessly in-
tegrated in order to model a response Y as a function of several predictors
X1, . . . , Xp.
7.1
Polynomial Regression
Historically, the standard way to extend linear regression to settings in
which the relationship between the predictors and the response is non-
linear has been to replace the standard linear model
yi = β0 + β1xi + ϵi
with a polynomial function
yi = β0 + β1xi + β2x2
i + β3x3
i + · · · + βdxd
i + ϵi,
(7.1)
where ϵi is the error term. This approach is known as polynomial regression, polynomial
regression
and in fact we saw an example of this method in Section 3.3.2. For large
enough degree d, a polynomial regression allows us to produce an extremely
non-linear curve. Notice that the coefficients in (7.1) can be easily estimated
using least squares linear regression because this is just a standard linear
model with predictors xi, x2
i , x3
i , . . . , xd
i . Generally speaking, it is unusual
to use d greater than 3 or 4 because for large values of d, the polynomial
curve can become overly flexible and can take on some very strange shapes.
This is especially true near the boundary of the X variable.
The left-hand panel in Figure 7.1 is a plot of wage against age for the
Wage data set, which contains income and demographic information for
males who reside in the central Atlantic region of the United States. We
see the results of fitting a degree-4 polynomial using least squares (solid
blue curve). Even though this is a linear regression model like any other,
the individual coefficients are not of particular interest. Instead, we look at
the entire fitted function across a grid of 63 values for age from 18 to 80 in
order to understand the relationship between age and wage.
