6.6 Exercises
287
(g) Comment on the results obtained. How accurately can we pre-
dict the number of college applications received? Is there much
difference among the test errors resulting from these five ap-
proaches?
10. We have seen that as the number of features used in a model increases,
the training error will necessarily decrease, but the test error may not.
We will now explore this in a simulated data set.
(a) Generate a data set with p = 20 features, n = 1,000 observa-
tions, and an associated quantitative response vector generated
according to the model
Y = Xβ + ϵ,
where β has some elements that are exactly equal to zero.
(b) Split your data set into a training set containing 100 observations
and a test set containing 900 observations.
(c) Perform best subset selection on the training set, and plot the
training set MSE associated with the best model of each size.
(d) Plot the test set MSE associated with the best model of each
size.
(e) For which model size does the test set MSE take on its minimum
value? Comment on your results. If it takes on its minimum value
for a model containing only an intercept or a model containing
all of the features, then play around with the way that you are
generating the data in (a) until you come up with a scenario in
which the test set MSE is minimized for an intermediate model
size.
(f) How does the model at which the test set MSE is minimized
compare to the true model used to generate the data? Comment
on the coefficient values.
(g) Create a plot displaying
G)p
j=1(βj −ˆβr
j )2 for a range of values
of r, where ˆβr
j is the jth coefficient estimate for the best model
containing r coefficients. Comment on what you observe. How
does this compare to the test MSE plot from (d)?
11. We will now try to predict per capita crime rate in the Boston data
set.
(a) Try out some of the regression methods explored in this chapter,
such as best subset selection, the lasso, ridge regression, and
PCR. Present and discuss results for the approaches that you
consider.
(b) Propose a model (or set of models) that seem to perform well on
this data set, and justify your answer. Make sure that you are
evaluating model performance using validation set error, cross-
validation, or some other reasonable alternative, as opposed to
using training error.
