4.8 Exercises
193
ax.set_ylabel('Poisson Regression Fit', fontsize=20)
ax.axline([0,0], c='black', linewidth=3,
linestyle='--', slope=1);
The predictions from the Poisson regression model are correlated with
those from the linear model; however, the former are non-negative. As a
result the Poisson regression predictions tend to be larger than those from
the linear model for either very low or very high levels of ridership.
In this section, we fit Poisson regression models using the sm.GLM() func-
tion with the argument family=sm.families.Poisson(). Earlier in this lab
we used the sm.GLM() function with family=sm.families.Binomial() to per-
form logistic regression. Other choices for the family argument can be used
to fit other types of GLMs. For instance, family=sm.families.Gamma() fits
a Gamma regression model.
4.8
Exercises
Conceptual
1. Using a little bit of algebra, prove that (4.2) is equivalent to (4.3). In
other words, the logistic function representation and logit represen-
tation for the logistic regression model are equivalent.
2. It was stated in the text that classifying an observation to the class
for which (4.17) is largest is equivalent to classifying an observation
to the class for which (4.18) is largest. Prove that this is the case. In
other words, under the assumption that the observations in the kth
class are drawn from a N(µk, σ2) distribution, the Bayes classifier
assigns an observation to the class for which the discriminant function
is maximized.
3. This problem relates to the QDA model, in which the observations
within each class are drawn from a normal distribution with a class-
specific mean vector and a class specific covariance matrix. We con-
sider the simple case where p = 1; i.e. there is only one feature.
Suppose that we have K classes, and that if an observation belongs
to the kth class then X comes from a one-dimensional normal dis-
tribution, X ∼N(µk, σ2
k). Recall that the density function for the
one-dimensional normal distribution is given in (4.16). Prove that in
this case, the Bayes classifier is not linear. Argue that it is in fact
quadratic.
Hint: For this problem, you should follow the arguments laid out in
Section 4.4.1, but without making the assumption that σ2
1 = · · · = σ2
K.
4. When the number of features p is large, there tends to be a deteri-
oration in the performance of KNN and other local approaches that
perform prediction using only observations that are near the test ob-
servation for which a prediction must be made. This phenomenon is
known as the curse of dimensionality, and it ties into the fact that curse of di-
mensionality
non-parametric approaches often perform poorly when p is large. We
will now investigate this curse.
