286
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
Applied
8. In this exercise, we will generate simulated data, and will then use
this data to perform forward and backward stepwise selection.
(a) Create a random number generator and use its normal() method
to generate a predictor X of length n = 100, as well as a noise
vector ϵ of length n = 100.
(b) Generate a response vector Y of length n = 100 according to
the model
Y = β0 + β1X + β2X2 + β3X3 + ϵ,
where β0, β1, β2, and β3 are constants of your choice.
(c) Use forward stepwise selection in order to select a model contain-
ing the predictors X, X2, . . . , X10. What is the model obtained
according to Cp? Report the coefficients of the model obtained.
(d) Repeat (c), using backwards stepwise selection. How does your
answer compare to the results in (c)?
(e) Now fit a lasso model to the simulated data, again using X, X2,
. . . , X10 as predictors. Use cross-validation to select the optimal
value of λ. Create plots of the cross-validation error as a function
of λ. Report the resulting coefficient estimates, and discuss the
results obtained.
(f) Now generate a response vector Y according to the model
Y = β0 + β7X7 + ϵ,
and perform forward stepwise selection and the lasso. Discuss
the results obtained.
9. In this exercise, we will predict the number of applications received
using the other variables in the College data set.
(a) Split the data set into a training set and a test set.
(b) Fit a linear model using least squares on the training set, and
report the test error obtained.
(c) Fit a ridge regression model on the training set, with λ chosen
by cross-validation. Report the test error obtained.
(d) Fit a lasso model on the training set, with λ chosen by cross-
validation. Report the test error obtained, along with the num-
ber of non-zero coefficient estimates.
(e) Fit a PCR model on the training set, with M chosen by cross-
validation. Report the test error obtained, along with the value
of M selected by cross-validation.
(f) Fit a PLS model on the training set, with M chosen by cross-
validation. Report the test error obtained, along with the value
of M selected by cross-validation.
