236
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
predictors. To apply these methods, we need a way to determine which of
these models is best. As we discussed in Section 6.1.1, the model containing
all of the predictors will always have the smallest RSS and the largest R2,
since these quantities are related to the training error. Instead, we wish to
choose a model with a low test error. As is evident here, and as we show
in Chapter 2, the training error can be a poor estimate of the test error.
Therefore, RSS and R2 are not suitable for selecting the best model among
a collection of models with different numbers of predictors.
In order to select the best model with respect to test error, we need to
estimate this test error. There are two common approaches:
1. We can indirectly estimate test error by making an adjustment to the
training error to account for the bias due to overfitting.
2. We can directly estimate the test error, using either a validation set
approach or a cross-validation approach, as discussed in Chapter 5.
We consider both of these approaches below.
Cp, AIC, BIC, and Adjusted R2
We show in Chapter 2 that the training set MSE is generally an under-
estimate of the test MSE. (Recall that MSE = RSS/n.) This is because
when we fit a model to the training data using least squares, we specifi-
cally estimate the regression coefficients such that the training RSS (but
not the test RSS) is as small as possible. In particular, the training error
will decrease as more variables are included in the model, but the test error
may not. Therefore, training set RSS and training set R2 cannot be used
to select from among a set of models with different numbers of variables.
However, a number of techniques for adjusting the training error for the
model size are available. These approaches can be used to select among a set
of models with different numbers of variables. We now consider four such
approaches: Cp, Akaike information criterion (AIC), Bayesian information Cp
Akaike
information
criterion
criterion (BIC), and adjusted R2. Figure 6.2 displays Cp, BIC, and adjusted
Bayesian
information
criterion
adjusted R2
R2 for the best model of each size produced by best subset selection on the
Credit data set.
For a fitted least squares model containing d predictors, the Cp estimate
of test MSE is computed using the equation
Cp = 1
n
'
RSS + 2dˆσ2(
,
(6.2)
where ˆσ2 is an estimate of the variance of the error ϵ associated with each
response measurement in (6.1).4 Typically ˆσ2 is estimated using the full
model containing all predictors. Essentially, the Cp statistic adds a penalty
of 2dˆσ2 to the training RSS in order to adjust for the fact that the training
error tends to underestimate the test error. Clearly, the penalty increases as
the number of predictors in the model increases; this is intended to adjust
4Mallow’s Cp is sometimes defined as C′
p = RSS/ˆσ2 + 2d −n. This is equivalent to
the definition given above in the sense that Cp = 1
n ˆσ2(C′
p + n), and so the model with
smallest Cp also has smallest C′
p.
