198
4. Classification
(e) Perform QDA on the training data in order to predict mpg01
using the variables that seemed most associated with mpg01 in
(b). What is the test error of the model obtained?
(f) Perform logistic regression on the training data in order to pre-
dict mpg01 using the variables that seemed most associated with
mpg01 in (b). What is the test error of the model obtained?
(g) Perform naive Bayes on the training data in order to predict
mpg01 using the variables that seemed most associated with mpg01
in (b). What is the test error of the model obtained?
(h) Perform KNN on the training data, with several values of K, in
order to predict mpg01. Use only the variables that seemed most
associated with mpg01 in (b). What test errors do you obtain?
Which value of K seems to perform the best on this data set?
15. This problem involves writing functions.
(a) Write a function, Power(), that prints out the result of raising 2
to the 3rd power. In other words, your function should compute
23 and print out the results.
Hint: Recall that x**a raises x to the power a. Use the print()
function to display the result.
(b) Create a new function, Power2(), that allows you to pass any
two numbers, x and a, and prints out the value of x**a. You can
do this by beginning your function with the line
def Power2(x, a):
You should be able to call your function by entering, for instance,
Power2(3, 8)
on the command line. This should output the value of 38, namely,
6, 561.
(c) Using the Power2() function that you just wrote, compute 103,
817, and 1313.
(d) Now create a new function, Power3(), that actually returns the
result x**a as a Python object, rather than simply printing it
to the screen. That is, if you store the value x**a in an object
called result within your function, then you can simply return return
this result, using the following line:
return result
Note that the line above should be the last line in your function,
and it should be indented 4 spaces.
(e) Now using the Power3() function, create a plot of f(x) = x2.
The x-axis should display a range of integers from 1 to 10, and
the y-axis should display x2. Label the axes appropriately, and
use an appropriate title for the figure. Consider displaying either
the x-axis, the y-axis, or both on the log-scale. You can do this
by using the ax.set_xscale() and ax.set_yscale() methods of .set_xscale()
.set_yscale()
the axes you are plotting to.
