6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods
259
0
10
20
30
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
PCR
Number of Components
Mean Squared Error
Squared Bias
Test MSE
Variance
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Ridge Regression and Lasso
Shrinkage Factor
Mean Squared Error
FIGURE 6.19. PCR, ridge regression, and the lasso were applied to a simu-
lated data set in which the first five principal components of X contain all the
information about the response Y . In each panel, the irreducible error Var(ϵ) is
shown as a horizontal dashed line. Left: Results for PCR. Right: Results for lasso
(solid) and ridge regression (dotted). The x-axis displays the shrinkage factor
of the coefficient estimates, defined as the ℓ2 norm of the shrunken coefficient
estimates divided by the ℓ2 norm of the least squares estimate.
in the regression model, the bias decreases, but the variance increases. This
results in a typical U-shape for the mean squared error. When M = p = 45,
then PCR amounts simply to a least squares fit using all of the original
predictors. The figure indicates that performing PCR with an appropriate
choice of M can result in a substantial improvement over least squares, es-
pecially in the left-hand panel. However, by examining the ridge regression
and lasso results in Figures 6.5, 6.8, and 6.9, we see that PCR does not
perform as well as the two shrinkage methods in this example.
The relatively worse performance of PCR in Figure 6.18 is a consequence
of the fact that the data were generated in such a way that many princi-
pal components are required in order to adequately model the response.
In contrast, PCR will tend to do well in cases when the first few principal
components are sufficient to capture most of the variation in the predictors
as well as the relationship with the response. The left-hand panel of Fig-
ure 6.19 illustrates the results from another simulated data set designed to
be more favorable to PCR. Here the response was generated in such a way
that it depends exclusively on the first five principal components. Now the
bias drops to zero rapidly as M, the number of principal components used
in PCR, increases. The mean squared error displays a clear minimum at
M = 5. The right-hand panel of Figure 6.19 displays the results on these
data using ridge regression and the lasso. All three methods offer a signif-
icant improvement over least squares. However, PCR and ridge regression
slightly outperform the lasso.
We note that even though PCR provides a simple way to perform re-
gression using M < p predictors, it is not a feature selection method. This
is because each of the M principal components used in the regression is a
linear combination of all p of the original features. For instance, in (6.19),
Z1 was a linear combination of both pop and ad. Therefore, while PCR of-
ten performs quite well in many practical settings, it does not result in the
