6.1 Subset Selection
233
Algorithm 6.2 Forward stepwise selection
1. Let M0 denote the null model, which contains no predictors.
2. For k = 0, . . . , p −1:
(a) Consider all p −k models that augment the predictors in Mk
with one additional predictor.
(b) Choose the best among these p −k models, and call it Mk+1.
Here best is defined as having smallest RSS or highest R2.
3. Select a single best model from among M0, . . . , Mp using the pre-
diction error on a validation set, Cp (AIC), BIC, or adjusted R2. Or
use the cross-validation method.
around 40, even with extremely fast modern computers. There are compu-
tational shortcuts—so called branch-and-bound techniques—for eliminat-
ing some choices, but these have their limitations as p gets large. They also
only work for least squares linear regression. We present computationally
efficient alternatives to best subset selection next.
6.1.2
Stepwise Selection
For computational reasons, best subset selection cannot be applied with
very large p. Best subset selection may also suffer from statistical problems
when p is large. The larger the search space, the higher the chance of finding
models that look good on the training data, even though they might not
have any predictive power on future data. Thus an enormous search space
can lead to overfitting and high variance of the coefficient estimates.
For both of these reasons, stepwise methods, which explore a far more
restricted set of models, are attractive alternatives to best subset selection.
Forward Stepwise Selection
Forward stepwise selection is a computationally efficient alternative to best forward
stepwise
selection
subset selection. While the best subset selection procedure considers all
2p possible models containing subsets of the p predictors, forward step-
wise considers a much smaller set of models. Forward stepwise selection
begins with a model containing no predictors, and then adds predictors
to the model, one-at-a-time, until all of the predictors are in the model.
In particular, at each step the variable that gives the greatest additional
improvement to the fit is added to the model. More formally, the forward
stepwise selection procedure is given in Algorithm 6.2.
Unlike best subset selection, which involved fitting 2p models, forward
stepwise selection involves fitting one null model, along with p −k models
in the kth iteration, for k = 0, . . . , p −1. This amounts to a total of 1 +
)p−1
k=0(p−k) = 1+p(p+1)/2 models. This is a substantial difference: when
