234
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
# Variables
Best subset
Forward stepwise
One
rating
rating
Two
rating, income
rating, income
Three
rating, income, student
rating, income, student
Four
cards, income
rating, income,
student, limit
student, limit
TABLE 6.1. The first four selected models for best subset selection and forward
stepwise selection on the Credit data set. The first three models are identical but
the fourth models differ.
p = 20, best subset selection requires fitting 1,048,576 models, whereas
forward stepwise selection requires fitting only 211 models.2
In Step 2(b) of Algorithm 6.2, we must identify the best model from
among those p−k that augment Mk with one additional predictor. We can
do this by simply choosing the model with the lowest RSS or the highest
R2. However, in Step 3, we must identify the best model among a set of
models with different numbers of variables. This is more challenging, and
is discussed in Section 6.1.3.
Forward stepwise selection’s computational advantage over best subset
selection is clear. Though forward stepwise tends to do well in practice,
it is not guaranteed to find the best possible model out of all 2p mod-
els containing subsets of the p predictors. For instance, suppose that in a
given data set with p = 3 predictors, the best possible one-variable model
contains X1, and the best possible two-variable model instead contains X2
and X3. Then forward stepwise selection will fail to select the best possible
two-variable model, because M1 will contain X1, so M2 must also contain
X1 together with one additional variable.
Table 6.1, which shows the first four selected models for best subset
and forward stepwise selection on the Credit data set, illustrates this phe-
nomenon. Both best subset selection and forward stepwise selection choose
rating for the best one-variable model and then include income and student
for the two- and three-variable models. However, best subset selection re-
places rating by cards in the four-variable model, while forward stepwise
selection must maintain rating in its four-variable model. In this example,
Figure 6.1 indicates that there is not much difference between the three-
and four-variable models in terms of RSS, so either of the four-variable
models will likely be adequate.
Forward stepwise selection can be applied even in the high-dimensional
setting where n < p; however, in this case, it is possible to construct sub-
models M0, . . . , Mn−1 only, since each submodel is fit using least squares,
which will not yield a unique solution if p ≥n.
Backward Stepwise Selection
Like forward stepwise selection, backward stepwise selection provides an backward
stepwise
selection
2Though forward stepwise selection considers p(p + 1)/2 + 1 models, it performs a
guided search over model space, and so the effective model space considered contains
substantially more than p(p + 1)/2 + 1 models.
