266
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
(6.7) was small; however, when p was larger then the lowest validation
set error was achieved using a larger value of λ. In each boxplot, rather
than reporting the values of λ used, the degrees of freedom of the resulting
lasso solution is displayed; this is simply the number of non-zero coefficient
estimates in the lasso solution, and is a measure of the flexibility of the
lasso fit. Figure 6.24 highlights three important points: (1) regularization
or shrinkage plays a key role in high-dimensional problems, (2) appropriate
tuning parameter selection is crucial for good predictive performance, and
(3) the test error tends to increase as the dimensionality of the problem
(i.e. the number of features or predictors) increases, unless the additional
features are truly associated with the response.
The third point above is in fact a key principle in the analysis of high-
dimensional data, which is known as the curse of dimensionality. One might curse of di-
mensionality
think that as the number of features used to fit a model increases, the
quality of the fitted model will increase as well. However, comparing the
left-hand and right-hand panels in Figure 6.24, we see that this is not
necessarily the case: in this example, the test set MSE almost doubles as
p increases from 20 to 2,000. In general, adding additional signal features
that are truly associated with the response will improve the fitted model,
in the sense of leading to a reduction in test set error. However, adding
noise features that are not truly associated with the response will lead
to a deterioration in the fitted model, and consequently an increased test
set error. This is because noise features increase the dimensionality of the
problem, exacerbating the risk of overfitting (since noise features may be
assigned nonzero coefficients due to chance associations with the response
on the training set) without any potential upside in terms of improved test
set error. Thus, we see that new technologies that allow for the collection
of measurements for thousands or millions of features are a double-edged
sword: they can lead to improved predictive models if these features are in
fact relevant to the problem at hand, but will lead to worse results if the
features are not relevant. Even if they are relevant, the variance incurred
in fitting their coefficients may outweigh the reduction in bias that they
bring.
6.4.4
Interpreting Results in High Dimensions
When we perform the lasso, ridge regression, or other regression proce-
dures in the high-dimensional setting, we must be quite cautious in the way
that we report the results obtained. In Chapter 3, we learned about multi-
collinearity, the concept that the variables in a regression might be corre-
lated with each other. In the high-dimensional setting, the multicollinearity
problem is extreme: any variable in the model can be written as a linear
combination of all of the other variables in the model. Essentially, this
means that we can never know exactly which variables (if any) truly are
predictive of the outcome, and we can never identify the best coefficients
for use in the regression. At most, we can hope to assign large regression
coefficients to variables that are correlated with the variables that truly are
predictive of the outcome.
