4.8 Exercises
197
(b) Use the full data set to perform a logistic regression with
Direction as the response and the five lag variables plus Volume
as predictors. Use the summary function to print the results. Do
any of the predictors appear to be statistically significant? If so,
which ones?
(c) Compute the confusion matrix and overall fraction of correct
predictions. Explain what the confusion matrix is telling you
about the types of mistakes made by logistic regression.
(d) Now fit the logistic regression model using a training data period
from 1990 to 2008, with Lag2 as the only predictor. Compute the
confusion matrix and the overall fraction of correct predictions
for the held out data (that is, the data from 2009 and 2010).
(e) Repeat (d) using LDA.
(f) Repeat (d) using QDA.
(g) Repeat (d) using KNN with K = 1.
(h) Repeat (d) using naive Bayes.
(i) Which of these methods appears to provide the best results on
this data?
(j) Experiment with different combinations of predictors, includ-
ing possible transformations and interactions, for each of the
methods. Report the variables, method, and associated confu-
sion matrix that appears to provide the best results on the held
out data. Note that you should also experiment with values for
K in the KNN classifier.
14. In this problem, you will develop a model to predict whether a given
car gets high or low gas mileage based on the Auto data set.
(a) Create a binary variable, mpg01, that contains a 1 if mpg contains
a value above its median, and a 0 if mpg contains a value below
its median. You can compute the median using the median()
method of the data frame. Note you may find it helpful to add
a column mpg01 to the data frame by assignment. Assuming you
have stored the data frame as Auto, this can be done as follows:
Auto['mpg01'] = mpg01
(b) Explore the data graphically in order to investigate the associ-
ation between mpg01 and the other features. Which of the other
features seem most likely to be useful in predicting mpg01? Scat-
terplots and boxplots may be useful tools to answer this ques-
tion. Describe your findings.
(c) Split the data into a training set and a test set.
(d) Perform LDA on the training data in order to predict mpg01
using the variables that seemed most associated with mpg01 in
(b). What is the test error of the model obtained?
