6.2 Shrinkage Methods
243
1e−01
1e+01
1e+03
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mean Squared Error
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Mean Squared Error
λ
∥ˆβR
λ ∥2/∥ˆβ∥2
FIGURE 6.5.
Squared bias (black), variance (green), and test mean squared
error (purple) for the ridge regression predictions on a simulated data set, as a
function of λ and ∥ˆβR
λ ∥2/∥ˆβ∥2. The horizontal dashed lines indicate the minimum
possible MSE. The purple crosses indicate the ridge regression models for which
the MSE is smallest.
of Figure 6.5 displays the variance of the ridge regression predictions as a
function of λ. At the least squares coefficient estimates, which correspond
to ridge regression with λ = 0, the variance is high but there is no bias. But
as λ increases, the shrinkage of the ridge coefficient estimates leads to a
substantial reduction in the variance of the predictions, at the expense of a
slight increase in bias. Recall that the test mean squared error (MSE), plot-
ted in purple, is closely related to the variance plus the squared bias. For
values of λ up to about 10, the variance decreases rapidly, with very little
increase in bias, plotted in black. Consequently, the MSE drops consider-
ably as λ increases from 0 to 10. Beyond this point, the decrease in variance
due to increasing λ slows, and the shrinkage on the coefficients causes them
to be significantly underestimated, resulting in a large increase in the bias.
The minimum MSE is achieved at approximately λ = 30. Interestingly,
because of its high variance, the MSE associated with the least squares
fit, when λ = 0, is almost as high as that of the null model for which all
coefficient estimates are zero, when λ = ∞. However, for an intermediate
value of λ, the MSE is considerably lower.
The right-hand panel of Figure 6.5 displays the same curves as the left-
hand panel, this time plotted against the ℓ2 norm of the ridge regression
coefficient estimates divided by the ℓ2 norm of the least squares estimates.
Now as we move from left to right, the fits become more flexible, and so
the bias decreases and the variance increases.
In general, in situations where the relationship between the response
and the predictors is close to linear, the least squares estimates will have
low bias but may have high variance. This means that a small change in
the training data can cause a large change in the least squares coefficient
estimates. In particular, when the number of variables p is almost as large
as the number of observations n, as in the example in Figure 6.5, the
least squares estimates will be extremely variable. And if p > n, then the
least squares estimates do not even have a unique solution, whereas ridge
regression can still perform well by trading off a small increase in bias for a
