246
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
When p = 2, then (6.8) indicates that the lasso coefficient estimates have
the smallest RSS out of all points that lie within the diamond defined by
|ОІ1| + |ОІ2| вүӨs. Similarly, the ridge regression estimates have the smallest
RSS out of all points that lie within the circle defined by ОІ2
1 + ОІ2
2 вүӨs.
We can think of (6.8) as follows. When we perform the lasso we are trying
to find the set of coefficient estimates that lead to the smallest RSS, subject
to the constraint that there is a budget s for how large )p
j=1 |ОІj| can be.
When s is extremely large, then this budget is not very restrictive, and so
the coefficient estimates can be large. In fact, if s is large enough that the
least squares solution falls within the budget, then (6.8) will simply yield
the least squares solution. In contrast, if s is small, then )p
j=1 |ОІj| must be
small in order to avoid violating the budget. Similarly, (6.9) indicates that
when we perform ridge regression, we seek a set of coefficient estimates
such that the RSS is as small as possible, subject to the requirement that
)p
j=1 ОІ2
j not exceed the budget s.
The formulations (6.8) and (6.9) reveal a close connection between the
lasso, ridge regression, and best subset selection. Consider the problem
minimize
ОІ
пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈІ
пЈҙ
пЈі
n
0
i=1
пЈ«
пЈӯyi вҲ’ОІ0 вҲ’
p
0
j=1
ОІjxij
пЈ¶
пЈё
2пЈј
пЈҙ
пЈҪ
пЈҙ
пЈҫ
subject to
p
0
j=1
I(ОІjМё = 0) вүӨs.
(6.10)
Here I(ОІjМё = 0) is an indicator variable: it takes on a value of 1 if ОІjМё = 0, and
equals zero otherwise. Then (6.10) amounts to finding a set of coefficient
estimates such that RSS is as small as possible, subject to the constraint
that no more than s coefficients can be nonzero. The problem (6.10) is
equivalent to best subset selection. Unfortunately, solving (6.10) is com-
putationally infeasible when p is large, since it requires considering all
'p
s
(
models containing s predictors. Therefore, we can interpret ridge regression
and the lasso as computationally feasible alternatives to best subset selec-
tion that replace the intractable form of the budget in (6.10) with forms
that are much easier to solve. Of course, the lasso is much more closely
related to best subset selection, since the lasso performs feature selection
for s sufficiently small in (6.8), while ridge regression does not.
The Variable Selection Property of the Lasso
Why is it that the lasso, unlike ridge regression, results in coefficient esti-
mates that are exactly equal to zero? The formulations (6.8) and (6.9) can
be used to shed light on the issue. Figure 6.7 illustrates the situation. The
least squares solution is marked as ЛҶОІ, while the blue diamond and circle
represent the lasso and ridge regression constraints in (6.8) and (6.9), re-
spectively. If s is sufficiently large, then the constraint regions will contain
ЛҶОІ, and so the ridge regression and lasso estimates will be the same as the
least squares estimates. (Such a large value of s corresponds to О» = 0 in
(6.5) and (6.7).) However, in Figure 6.7 the least squares estimates lie out-
side of the diamond and the circle, and so the least squares estimates are
not the same as the lasso and ridge regression estimates.
Each of the ellipses centered around ЛҶОІ represents a contour: this means contour
that all of the points on a particular ellipse have the same RSS value. As
