262
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
thogonalized data in exactly the same fashion as Z1 was computed based
on the original data. This iterative approach can be repeated M times to
identify multiple PLS components Z1, . . . , ZM. Finally, at the end of this
procedure, we use least squares to fit a linear model to predict Y using
Z1, . . . , ZM in exactly the same fashion as for PCR.
As with PCR, the number M of partial least squares directions used in
PLS is a tuning parameter that is typically chosen by cross-validation. We
generally standardize the predictors and response before performing PLS.
PLS is popular in the field of chemometrics, where many variables arise
from digitized spectrometry signals. In practice it often performs no better
than ridge regression or PCR. While the supervised dimension reduction
of PLS can reduce bias, it also has the potential to increase variance, so
that the overall benefit of PLS relative to PCR is a wash.
6.4
Considerations in High Dimensions
6.4.1
High-Dimensional Data
Most traditional statistical techniques for regression and classification are
intended for the low-dimensional setting in which n, the number of ob- low-
dimensional
servations, is much greater than p, the number of features. This is due in
part to the fact that throughout most of the field’s history, the bulk of sci-
entific problems requiring the use of statistics have been low-dimensional.
For instance, consider the task of developing a model to predict a patient’s
blood pressure on the basis of his or her age, sex, and body mass index
(BMI). There are three predictors, or four if an intercept is included in the
model, and perhaps several thousand patients for whom blood pressure
and age, sex, and BMI are available. Hence n ≫p, and so the problem is
low-dimensional. (By dimension here we are referring to the size of p.)
In the past 20 years, new technologies have changed the way that data
are collected in fields as diverse as finance, marketing, and medicine. It is
now commonplace to collect an almost unlimited number of feature mea-
surements (p very large). While p can be extremely large, the number of
observations n is often limited due to cost, sample availability, or other
considerations. Two examples are as follows:
1. Rather than predicting blood pressure on the basis of just age, sex,
and BMI, one might also collect measurements for half a million sin-
gle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; these are individual DNA mu-
tations that are relatively common in the population) for inclusion in
the predictive model. Then n ≈200 and p ≈500,000.
2. A marketing analyst interested in understanding people’s online shop-
ping patterns could treat as features all of the search terms entered
by users of a search engine. This is sometimes known as the “bag-of-
words” model. The same researcher might have access to the search
histories of only a few hundred or a few thousand search engine users
who have consented to share their information with the researcher.
For a given user, each of the p search terms is scored present (0) or
