252
6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization
5e−03
5e−02
5e−01
5e+00
25.0
25.2
25.4
25.6
Cross−Validation Error
5e−03
5e−02
5e−01
5e+00
−300
−100
0
100
300
Standardized Coefficients
λ
λ
FIGURE 6.12.
Left: Cross-validation errors that result from applying ridge
regression to the Credit data set with various values of λ. Right: The coefficient
estimates as a function of λ. The vertical dashed lines indicate the value of λ
selected by cross-validation.
6.2.3
Selecting the Tuning Parameter
Just as the subset selection approaches considered in Section 6.1 require
a method to determine which of the models under consideration is best,
implementing ridge regression and the lasso requires a method for selecting
a value for the tuning parameter λ in (6.5) and (6.7), or equivalently, the
value of the constraint s in (6.9) and (6.8). Cross-validation provides a sim-
ple way to tackle this problem. We choose a grid of λ values, and compute
the cross-validation error for each value of λ, as described in Chapter 5. We
then select the tuning parameter value for which the cross-validation error
is smallest. Finally, the model is re-fit using all of the available observations
and the selected value of the tuning parameter.
Figure 6.12 displays the choice of λ that results from performing leave-
one-out cross-validation on the ridge regression fits from the Credit data
set. The dashed vertical lines indicate the selected value of λ. In this case
the value is relatively small, indicating that the optimal fit only involves a
small amount of shrinkage relative to the least squares solution. In addition,
the dip is not very pronounced, so there is rather a wide range of values
that would give a very similar error. In a case like this we might simply use
the least squares solution.
Figure 6.13 provides an illustration of ten-fold cross-validation applied to
the lasso fits on the sparse simulated data from Figure 6.9. The left-hand
panel of Figure 6.13 displays the cross-validation error, while the right-hand
panel displays the coefficient estimates. The vertical dashed lines indicate
the point at which the cross-validation error is smallest. The two colored
lines in the right-hand panel of Figure 6.13 represent the two predictors
that are related to the response, while the grey lines represent the unre-
lated predictors; these are often referred to as signal and noise variables, signal
respectively. Not only has the lasso correctly given much larger coeffi-
cient estimates to the two signal predictors, but also the minimum cross-
validation error corresponds to a set of coefficient estimates for which only
the signal variables are non-zero. Hence cross-validation together with the
lasso has correctly identified the two signal variables in the model, even
though this is a challenging setting, with p = 45 variables and only n = 50
