8.1 The Basics of Decision Trees
339
2
4
6
8
10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Tree Size
Mean Squared Error
Training
Cross−Validation
Test
FIGURE 8.5.
Regression tree analysis for the Hitters data. The training,
cross-validation, and test MSE are shown as a function of the number of terminal
nodes in the pruned tree. Standard error bands are displayed. The minimum
cross-validation error occurs at a tree size of three.
node purity—a small value indicates that a node contains predominantly
observations from a single class.
An alternative to the Gini index is entropy, given by
entropy
D = −
K
0
k=1
ˆpmk log ˆpmk.
(8.7)
Since 0 ≤ˆpmk ≤1, it follows that 0 ≤−ˆpmk log ˆpmk. One can show that
the entropy will take on a value near zero if the ˆpmk’s are all near zero or
near one. Therefore, like the Gini index, the entropy will take on a small
value if the mth node is pure. In fact, it turns out that the Gini index and
the entropy are quite similar numerically.
When building a classification tree, either the Gini index or the entropy
are typically used to evaluate the quality of a particular split, since these
two approaches are more sensitive to node purity than is the classification
error rate. Any of these three approaches might be used when pruning the
tree, but the classification error rate is preferable if prediction accuracy of
the final pruned tree is the goal.
Figure 8.6 shows an example on the Heart data set. These data con-
tain a binary outcome HD for 303 patients who presented with chest pain.
An outcome value of Yes indicates the presence of heart disease based on
an angiographic test, while No means no heart disease. There are 13 predic-
tors including Age, Sex, Chol (a cholesterol measurement), and other heart
and lung function measurements. Cross-validation results in a tree with six
terminal nodes.
In our discussion thus far, we have assumed that the predictor vari-
ables take on continuous values. However, decision trees can be constructed
even in the presence of qualitative predictor variables. For instance, in the
Heart data, some of the predictors, such as Sex, Thal (Thallium stress test),
