8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees
343
8.2
Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and
Bayesian Additive Regression Trees
An ensemble method is an approach that combines many simple “building ensemble
block” models in order to obtain a single and potentially very powerful
model. These simple building block models are sometimes known as weak
learners, since they may lead to mediocre predictions on their own.
weak
learners
We will now discuss bagging, random forests, boosting, and Bayesian
additive regression trees. These are ensemble methods for which the simple
building block is a regression or a classification tree.
8.2.1
Bagging
The bootstrap, introduced in Chapter 5, is an extremely powerful idea. It is
used in many situations in which it is hard or even impossible to directly
compute the standard deviation of a quantity of interest. We see here that
the bootstrap can be used in a completely different context, in order to
improve statistical learning methods such as decision trees.
The decision trees discussed in Section 8.1 suffer from high variance.
This means that if we split the training data into two parts at random,
and fit a decision tree to both halves, the results that we get could be
quite different. In contrast, a procedure with low variance will yield similar
results if applied repeatedly to distinct data sets; linear regression tends
to have low variance, if the ratio of n to p is moderately large. Bootstrap
aggregation, or bagging, is a general-purpose procedure for reducing the bagging
variance of a statistical learning method; we introduce it here because it is
particularly useful and frequently used in the context of decision trees.
Recall that given a set of n independent observations Z1, . . . , Zn, each
with variance σ2, the variance of the mean ¯Z of the observations is given
by σ2/n. In other words, averaging a set of observations reduces variance.
Hence a natural way to reduce the variance and increase the test set ac-
curacy of a statistical learning method is to take many training sets from
the population, build a separate prediction model using each training set,
and average the resulting predictions. In other words, we could calculate
ˆf 1(x), ˆf 2(x), . . . , ˆf B(x) using B separate training sets, and average them
in order to obtain a single low-variance statistical learning model, given by
ˆfavg(x) = 1
B
B
0
b=1
ˆf b(x).
Of course, this is not practical because we generally do not have access
to multiple training sets. Instead, we can bootstrap, by taking repeated
samples from the (single) training data set. In this approach we generate
B different bootstrapped training data sets. We then train our method on
the bth bootstrapped training set in order to get ˆf ∗b(x), and finally average
all the predictions, to obtain
ˆfbag(x) = 1
B
B
0
b=1
ˆf ∗b(x).
