302
7. Moving Beyond Linearity
freedom is somewhat technical. We can write
ˆgλ = Sλy,
(7.12)
where ˆgλ is the solution to (7.11) for a particular choice of λ—that is, it
is an n-vector containing the fitted values of the smoothing spline at the
training points x1, . . . , xn. Equation 7.12 indicates that the vector of fitted
values when applying a smoothing spline to the data can be written as a
n × n matrix Sλ (for which there is a formula) times the response vector
y. Then the effective degrees of freedom is defined to be
dfλ =
n
0
i=1
{Sλ}ii,
(7.13)
the sum of the diagonal elements of the matrix Sλ.
In fitting a smoothing spline, we do not need to select the number or
location of the knots—there will be a knot at each training observation,
x1, . . . , xn. Instead, we have another problem: we need to choose the value
of λ. It should come as no surprise that one possible solution to this problem
is cross-validation. In other words, we can find the value of λ that makes
the cross-validated RSS as small as possible. It turns out that the leave-
one-out cross-validation error (LOOCV) can be computed very efficiently
for smoothing splines, with essentially the same cost as computing a single
fit, using the following formula:
RSScv(λ) =
n
0
i=1
(yi −ˆg(−i)
λ
(xi))2 =
n
0
i=1
3yi −ˆgλ(xi)
1 −{Sλ}ii
42
.
The notation ˆg(−i)
λ
(xi) indicates the fitted value for this smoothing spline
evaluated at xi, where the fit uses all of the training observations except
for the ith observation (xi, yi). In contrast, ˆgλ(xi) indicates the smoothing
spline function fit to all of the training observations and evaluated at xi.
This remarkable formula says that we can compute each of these leave-
one-out fits using only ˆgλ, the original fit to all of the data!5 We have
a very similar formula (5.2) on page 205 in Chapter 5 for least squares
linear regression. Using (5.2), we can very quickly perform LOOCV for
the regression splines discussed earlier in this chapter, as well as for least
squares regression using arbitrary basis functions.
Figure 7.8 shows the results from fitting a smoothing spline to the Wage
data. The red curve indicates the fit obtained from pre-specifying that we
would like a smoothing spline with 16 effective degrees of freedom. The blue
curve is the smoothing spline obtained when λ is chosen using LOOCV; in
this case, the value of λ chosen results in 6.8 effective degrees of freedom
(computed using (7.13)). For this data, there is little discernible difference
between the two smoothing splines, beyond the fact that the one with 16
degrees of freedom seems slightly wigglier. Since there is little difference
between the two fits, the smoothing spline fit with 6.8 degrees of freedom
5The exact formulas for computing ˆg(xi) and Sλ are very technical; however, efficient
algorithms are available for computing these quantities.
