8.1 The Basics of Decision Trees
337
Algorithm 8.1 Building a Regression Tree
1. Use recursive binary splitting to grow a large tree on the training
data, stopping only when each terminal node has fewer than some
minimum number of observations.
2. Apply cost complexity pruning to the large tree in order to obtain a
sequence of best subtrees, as a function of α.
3. Use K-fold cross-validation to choose α. That is, divide the training
observations into K folds. For each k = 1, . . . , K:
(a) Repeat Steps 1 and 2 on all but the kth fold of the training data.
(b) Evaluate the mean squared prediction error on the data in the
left-out kth fold, as a function of α.
Average the results for each value of α, and pick α to minimize the
average error.
4. Return the subtree from Step 2 that corresponds to the chosen value
of α.
a function of α. (We chose to perform six-fold cross-validation because
132 is an exact multiple of six.) The unpruned regression tree is shown
in Figure 8.4. The green curve in Figure 8.5 shows the CV error as a
function of the number of leaves,2 while the orange curve indicates the
test error. Also shown are standard error bars around the estimated errors.
For reference, the training error curve is shown in black. The CV error
is a reasonable approximation of the test error: the CV error takes on its
minimum for a three-node tree, while the test error also dips down at the
three-node tree (though it takes on its lowest value at the ten-node tree).
The pruned tree containing three terminal nodes is shown in Figure 8.1.
8.1.2
Classification Trees
A classification tree is very similar to a regression tree, except that it is classification
tree
used to predict a qualitative response rather than a quantitative one. Re-
call that for a regression tree, the predicted response for an observation is
given by the mean response of the training observations that belong to the
same terminal node. In contrast, for a classification tree, we predict that
each observation belongs to the most commonly occurring class of training
observations in the region to which it belongs. In interpreting the results of
a classification tree, we are often interested not only in the class prediction
corresponding to a particular terminal node region, but also in the class
proportions among the training observations that fall into that region.
The task of growing a classification tree is quite similar to the task of
growing a regression tree. Just as in the regression setting, we use recursive
2Although CV error is computed as a function of α, it is convenient to display the
result as a function of |T|, the number of leaves; this is based on the relationship between
α and |T| in the original tree grown to all the training data.
