8.4 Exercises
365
(a) Split the data set into a training set and a test set.
(b) Fit a regression tree to the training set. Plot the tree, and inter-
pret the results. What test MSE do you obtain?
(c) Use cross-validation in order to determine the optimal level of
tree complexity. Does pruning the tree improve the test MSE?
(d) Use the bagging approach in order to analyze this data. What
test MSE do you obtain? Use the feature_importance_ values to
determine which variables are most important.
(e) Use random forests to analyze this data. What test MSE do
you obtain? Use the feature_importance_ values to determine
which variables are most important. Describe the effect of m, the
number of variables considered at each split, on the error rate
obtained.
(f) Now analyze the data using BART, and report your results.
9. This problem involves the OJ data set which is part of the ISLP
package.
(a) Create a training set containing a random sample of 800 obser-
vations, and a test set containing the remaining observations.
(b) Fit a tree to the training data, with Purchase as the response
and the other variables as predictors. What is the training error
rate?
(c) Create a plot of the tree, and interpret the results. How many
terminal nodes does the tree have?
(d) Use the export_tree() function to produce a text summary of
the fitted tree. Pick one of the terminal nodes, and interpret the
information displayed.
(e) Predict the response on the test data, and produce a confusion
matrix comparing the test labels to the predicted test labels.
What is the test error rate?
(f) Use cross-validation on the training set in order to determine
the optimal tree size.
(g) Produce a plot with tree size on the x-axis and cross-validated
classification error rate on the y-axis.
(h) Which tree size corresponds to the lowest cross-validated classi-
fication error rate?
(i) Produce a pruned tree corresponding to the optimal tree size
obtained using cross-validation. If cross-validation does not lead
to selection of a pruned tree, then create a pruned tree with five
terminal nodes.
(j) Compare the training error rates between the pruned and un-
pruned trees. Which is higher?
(k) Compare the test error rates between the pruned and unpruned
trees. Which is higher?
