308
7. Moving Beyond Linearity
We do not have to use splines as the building blocks for GAMs: we can
just as well use local regression, polynomial regression, or any combination
of the approaches seen earlier in this chapter in order to create a GAM.
GAMs are investigated in further detail in the lab at the end of this chapter.
Pros and Cons of GAMs
Before we move on, let us summarize the advantages and limitations of a
GAM.
L GAMs allow us to fit a non-linear fj to each Xj, so that we can
automatically model non-linear relationships that standard linear re-
gression will miss. This means that we do not need to manually try
out many different transformations on each variable individually.
L The non-linear fits can potentially make more accurate predictions
for the response Y .
L Because the model is additive, we can examine the effect of each Xj
on Y individually while holding all of the other variables fixed.
L The smoothness of the function fj for the variable Xj can be sum-
marized via degrees of freedom.
N The main limitation of GAMs is that the model is restricted to be
additive. With many variables, important interactions can be missed.
However, as with linear regression, we can manually add interaction
terms to the GAM model by including additional predictors of the
form Xj × Xk. In addition we can add low-dimensional interaction
functions of the form fjk(Xj, Xk) into the model; such terms can
be fit using two-dimensional smoothers such as local regression, or
two-dimensional splines (not covered here).
For fully general models, we have to look for even more flexible approaches
such as random forests and boosting, described in Chapter 8. GAMs provide
a useful compromise between linear and fully nonparametric models.
7.7.2
GAMs for Classification Problems
GAMs can also be used in situations where Y is qualitative. For simplicity,
here we assume Y takes on values 0 or 1, and let p(X) = Pr(Y = 1|X) be
the conditional probability (given the predictors) that the response equals
one. Recall the logistic regression model (4.6):
log
*
p(X)
1 −p(X)
+
= β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + · · · + βpXp.
(7.17)
The left-hand side is the log of the odds of P(Y = 1|X) versus P(Y = 0|X),
which (7.17) represents as a linear function of the predictors. A natural way
to extend (7.17) to allow for non-linear relationships is to use the model
log
*
p(X)
1 −p(X)
+
= β0 + f1(X1) + f2(X2) + · · · + fp(Xp).
(7.18)
