7.4 Regression Splines
299
2
4
6
8
10
1600
1620
1640
1660
1680
Degrees of Freedom of Natural Spline
Mean Squared Error
2
4
6
8
10
1600
1620
1640
1660
1680
Degrees of Freedom of Cubic Spline
Mean Squared Error
FIGURE 7.6. Ten-fold cross-validated mean squared errors for selecting the
degrees of freedom when fitting splines to the Wage data. The response is wage
and the predictor age. Left: A natural cubic spline. Right: A cubic spline.
then compute the overall cross-validated RSS. This procedure can be re-
peated for different numbers of knots K. Then the value of K giving the
smallest RSS is chosen.
Figure 7.6 shows ten-fold cross-validated mean squared errors for splines
with various degrees of freedom fit to the Wage data. The left-hand panel
corresponds to a natural cubic spline and the right-hand panel to a cu-
bic spline. The two methods produce almost identical results, with clear
evidence that a one-degree fit (a linear regression) is not adequate. Both
curves flatten out quickly, and it seems that three degrees of freedom for
the natural spline and four degrees of freedom for the cubic spline are quite
adequate.
In Section 7.7 we fit additive spline models simultaneously on several
variables at a time. This could potentially require the selection of degrees
of freedom for each variable. In cases like this we typically adopt a more
pragmatic approach and set the degrees of freedom to a fixed number, say
four, for all terms.
7.4.5
Comparison to Polynomial Regression
Figure 7.7 compares a natural cubic spline with 15 degrees of freedom to a
degree-15 polynomial on the Wage data set. The extra flexibility in the poly-
nomial produces undesirable results at the boundaries, while the natural
cubic spline still provides a reasonable fit to the data. Regression splines
often give superior results to polynomial regression. This is because unlike
polynomials, which must use a high degree (exponent in the highest mono-
mial term, e.g. X15) to produce flexible fits, splines introduce flexibility
by increasing the number of knots but keeping the degree fixed. Generally,
this approach produces more stable estimates. Splines also allow us to place
more knots, and hence flexibility, over regions where the function f seems
to be changing rapidly, and fewer knots where f appears more stable.
