8.1 The Basics of Decision Trees
341
servations. Why, then, is the split performed at all? The split is performed
because it leads to increased node purity. That is, all 9 of the observations
corresponding to the right-hand leaf have a response value of Yes, whereas
7/11 of those corresponding to the left-hand leaf have a response value of
Yes. Why is node purity important? Suppose that we have a test obser-
vation that belongs to the region given by that right-hand leaf. Then we
can be pretty certain that its response value is Yes. In contrast, if a test
observation belongs to the region given by the left-hand leaf, then its re-
sponse value is probably Yes, but we are much less certain. Even though
the split RestECG<1 does not reduce the classification error, it improves the
Gini index and the entropy, which are more sensitive to node purity.
8.1.3
Trees Versus Linear Models
Regression and classification trees have a very different flavor from the more
classical approaches for regression and classification presented in Chapters 3
and 4. In particular, linear regression assumes a model of the form
f(X) = β0 +
p
0
j=1
Xjβj,
(8.8)
whereas regression trees assume a model of the form
f(X) =
M
0
m=1
cm · 1(X∈Rm)
(8.9)
where R1, . . . , RM represent a partition of feature space, as in Figure 8.3.
Which model is better? It depends on the problem at hand. If the re-
lationship between the features and the response is well approximated by
a linear model as in (8.8), then an approach such as linear regression will
likely work well, and will outperform a method such as a regression tree
that does not exploit this linear structure. If instead there is a highly non-
linear and complex relationship between the features and the response as
indicated by model (8.9), then decision trees may outperform classical ap-
proaches. An illustrative example is displayed in Figure 8.7. The relative
performances of tree-based and classical approaches can be assessed by es-
timating the test error, using either cross-validation or the validation set
approach (Chapter 5).
Of course, other considerations beyond simply test error may come into
play in selecting a statistical learning method; for instance, in certain set-
tings, prediction using a tree may be preferred for the sake of interpretabil-
ity and visualization.
8.1.4
Advantages and Disadvantages of Trees
Decision trees for regression and classification have a number of advantages
over the more classical approaches seen in Chapters 3 and 4:
L Trees are very easy to explain to people. In fact, they are even easier
to explain than linear regression!
