9.1 Maximal Margin Classifier
371
−1
0
1
2
3
−1
0
1
2
3
X1
X2
FIGURE 9.3.
There are two classes of observations, shown in blue and in
purple. The maximal margin hyperplane is shown as a solid line. The margin
is the distance from the solid line to either of the dashed lines. The two blue
points and the purple point that lie on the dashed lines are the support vectors,
and the distance from those points to the hyperplane is indicated by arrows. The
purple and blue grid indicates the decision rule made by a classifier based on this
separating hyperplane.
as the maximal margin classifier. We hope that a classifier that has a large maximal
margin
classifier
margin on the training data will also have a large margin on the test data,
and hence will classify the test observations correctly. Although the maxi-
mal margin classifier is often successful, it can also lead to overfitting when
p is large.
If β0, β1, . . . , βp are the coefficients of the maximal margin hyperplane,
then the maximal margin classifier classifies the test observation x∗based
on the sign of f(x∗) = β0 + β1x∗
1 + β2x∗
2 + · · · + βpx∗
p.
Figure 9.3 shows the maximal margin hyperplane on the data set of
Figure 9.2. Comparing the right-hand panel of Figure 9.2 to Figure 9.3,
we see that the maximal margin hyperplane shown in Figure 9.3 does in-
deed result in a greater minimal distance between the observations and the
separating hyperplane—that is, a larger margin. In a sense, the maximal
margin hyperplane represents the mid-line of the widest “slab” that we can
insert between the two classes.
Examining Figure 9.3, we see that three training observations are equidis-
tant from the maximal margin hyperplane and lie along the dashed lines
indicating the width of the margin. These three observations are known as
support vectors, since they are vectors in p-dimensional space (in Figure 9.3, support
vector
p = 2) and they “support” the maximal margin hyperplane in the sense
that if these points were moved slightly then the maximal margin hyper-
plane would move as well. Interestingly, the maximal margin hyperplane
depends directly on the support vectors, but not on the other observations:
a movement to any of the other observations would not affect the separating
hyperplane, provided that the observation’s movement does not cause it to
