7.6 Local Regression
303
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
50
100
200
300
Age
Wage
Smoothing Spline
16 Degrees of Freedom
6.8 Degrees of Freedom (LOOCV)
FIGURE 7.8. Smoothing spline fits to the Wage data. The red curve results
from specifying 16 effective degrees of freedom. For the blue curve, λ was found
automatically by leave-one-out cross-validation, which resulted in 6.8 effective
degrees of freedom.
is preferable, since in general simpler models are better unless the data
provides evidence in support of a more complex model.
7.6
Local Regression
Local regression is a different approach for fitting flexible non-linear func- local
regression
tions, which involves computing the fit at a target point x0 using only the
nearby training observations. Figure 7.9 illustrates the idea on some simu-
lated data, with one target point near 0.4, and another near the boundary
at 0.05. In this figure the blue line represents the function f(x) from which
the data were generated, and the light orange line corresponds to the local
regression estimate ˆf(x). Local regression is described in Algorithm 7.1.
Note that in Step 3 of Algorithm 7.1, the weights Ki0 will differ for each
value of x0. In other words, in order to obtain the local regression fit at a
new point, we need to fit a new weighted least squares regression model by
minimizing (7.14) for a new set of weights. Local regression is sometimes
referred to as a memory-based procedure, because like nearest-neighbors, we
need all the training data each time we wish to compute a prediction. We
will avoid getting into the technical details of local regression here—there
are books written on the topic.
In order to perform local regression, there are a number of choices to
be made, such as how to define the weighting function K, and whether
to fit a linear, constant, or quadratic regression in Step 3. (Equation 7.14
corresponds to a linear regression.) While all of these choices make some
difference, the most important choice is the span s, which is the proportion
of points used to compute the local regression at x0, as defined in Step 1
above. The span plays a role like that of the tuning parameter λ in smooth-
