384
9. Support Vector Machines
9.4.1
One-Versus-One Classification
Suppose that we would like to perform classification using SVMs, and there
are K > 2 classes. A one-versus-one or all-pairs approach constructs
'K
2
(
one-versus-
one
SVMs, each of which compares a pair of classes. For example, one such
SVM might compare the kth class, coded as +1, to the kвҖІth class, coded
as вҲ’1. We classify a test observation using each of the
'K
2
(
classifiers, and
we tally the number of times that the test observation is assigned to each
of the K classes. The final classification is performed by assigning the test
observation to the class to which it was most frequently assigned in these
'K
2
(
pairwise classifications.
9.4.2
One-Versus-All Classification
The one-versus-all approach (also referred to as one-versus-rest) is an al- one-versus-
all
one-versus-
rest
ternative procedure for applying SVMs in the case of K > 2 classes. We
fit K SVMs, each time comparing one of the K classes to the remaining
K вҲ’1 classes. Let ОІ0k, ОІ1k, . . . , ОІpk denote the parameters that result from
fitting an SVM comparing the kth class (coded as +1) to the others (coded
as вҲ’1). Let xвҲ—denote a test observation. We assign the observation to the
class for which ОІ0k +ОІ1kxвҲ—
1 +ОІ2kxвҲ—
2 +В· В· В·+ОІpkxвҲ—
p is largest, as this amounts
to a high level of confidence that the test observation belongs to the kth
class rather than to any of the other classes.
9.5
Relationship to Logistic Regression
When SVMs were first introduced in the mid-1990s, they made quite a
splash in the statistical and machine learning communities. This was due
in part to their good performance, good marketing, and also to the fact
that the underlying approach seemed both novel and mysterious. The idea
of finding a hyperplane that separates the data as well as possible, while al-
lowing some violations to this separation, seemed distinctly different from
classical approaches for classification, such as logistic regression and lin-
ear discriminant analysis. Moreover, the idea of using a kernel to expand
the feature space in order to accommodate non-linear class boundaries ap-
peared to be a unique and valuable characteristic.
However, since that time, deep connections between SVMs and other
more classical statistical methods have emerged. It turns out that one can
rewrite the criterion (9.12)вҖ“(9.15) for fitting the support vector classifier
f(X) = ОІ0 + ОІ1X1 + В· В· В· + ОІpXp as
minimize
ОІ0,ОІ1,...,ОІp
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
n
0
i=1
max [0, 1 вҲ’yif(xi)] + О»
p
0
j=1
ОІ2
j
пЈј
пЈҪ
пЈҫ,
(9.25)
where О» is a nonnegative tuning parameter. When О» is large then ОІ1, . . . , ОІp
are small, more violations to the margin are tolerated, and a low-variance
but high-bias classifier will result. When О» is small then few violations
to the margin will occur; this amounts to a high-variance but low-bias
