336
8. Tree-Based Methods
with fewer splits (that is, fewer regions R1, . . . , RJ) might lead to lower
variance and better interpretation at the cost of a little bias. One possible
alternative to the process described above is to build the tree only so long
as the decrease in the RSS due to each split exceeds some (high) threshold.
This strategy will result in smaller trees, but is too short-sighted since a
seemingly worthless split early on in the tree might be followed by a very
good split—that is, a split that leads to a large reduction in RSS later on.
Therefore, a better strategy is to grow a very large tree T0, and then
prune it back in order to obtain a subtree. How do we determine the best prune
subtree
way to prune the tree? Intuitively, our goal is to select a subtree that
leads to the lowest test error rate. Given a subtree, we can estimate its
test error using cross-validation or the validation set approach. However,
estimating the cross-validation error for every possible subtree would be too
cumbersome, since there is an extremely large number of possible subtrees.
Instead, we need a way to select a small set of subtrees for consideration.
Cost complexity pruning—also known as weakest link pruning—gives us cost
complexity
pruning
weakest link
pruning
a way to do just this. Rather than considering every possible subtree, we
consider a sequence of trees indexed by a nonnegative tuning parameter α.
For each value of α there corresponds a subtree T ⊂T0 such that
|T |
0
m=1
0
i: xi∈Rm
(yi −ˆyRm)2 + α|T|
(8.4)
is as small as possible. Here |T| indicates the number of terminal nodes
of the tree T, Rm is the rectangle (i.e. the subset of predictor space) cor-
responding to the mth terminal node, and ˆyRm is the predicted response
associated with Rm—that is, the mean of the training observations in Rm.
The tuning parameter α controls a trade-off between the subtree’s com-
plexity and its fit to the training data. When α = 0, then the subtree T
will simply equal T0, because then (8.4) just measures the training error.
However, as α increases, there is a price to pay for having a tree with
many terminal nodes, and so the quantity (8.4) will tend to be minimized
for a smaller subtree. Equation 8.4 is reminiscent of the lasso (6.7) from
Chapter 6, in which a similar formulation was used in order to control the
complexity of a linear model.
It turns out that as we increase α from zero in (8.4), branches get pruned
from the tree in a nested and predictable fashion, so obtaining the whole
sequence of subtrees as a function of α is easy. We can select a value of
α using a validation set or using cross-validation. We then return to the
full data set and obtain the subtree corresponding to α. This process is
summarized in Algorithm 8.1.
Figures 8.4 and 8.5 display the results of fitting and pruning a regression
tree on the Hitters data, using nine of the features. First, we randomly
divided the data set in half, yielding 132 observations in the training set
and 131 observations in the test set. We then built a large regression tree
on the training data and varied α in (8.4) in order to create subtrees with
different numbers of terminal nodes. Finally, we performed six-fold cross-
validation in order to estimate the cross-validated MSE of the trees as
