9.2 Support Vector Classifiers
373
0
1
2
3
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
X1
X2
FIGURE 9.4.
There are two classes of observations, shown in blue and in
purple. In this case, the two classes are not separable by a hyperplane, and so the
maximal margin classifier cannot be used.
margin classifier. In this case, the optimization problem (9.9)–(9.11) has no
solution with M > 0. An example is shown in Figure 9.4. In this case, we
cannot exactly separate the two classes. However, as we will see in the next
section, we can extend the concept of a separating hyperplane in order to
develop a hyperplane that almost separates the classes, using a so-called
soft margin. The generalization of the maximal margin classifier to the
non-separable case is known as the support vector classifier.
9.2
Support Vector Classifiers
9.2.1
Overview of the Support Vector Classifier
In Figure 9.4, we see that observations that belong to two classes are not
necessarily separable by a hyperplane. In fact, even if a separating hyper-
plane does exist, then there are instances in which a classifier based on
a separating hyperplane might not be desirable. A classifier based on a
separating hyperplane will necessarily perfectly classify all of the training
observations; this can lead to sensitivity to individual observations. An ex-
ample is shown in Figure 9.5. The addition of a single observation in the
right-hand panel of Figure 9.5 leads to a dramatic change in the maxi-
mal margin hyperplane. The resulting maximal margin hyperplane is not
satisfactory—for one thing, it has only a tiny margin. This is problematic
because as discussed previously, the distance of an observation from the
hyperplane can be seen as a measure of our confidence that the obser-
vation was correctly classified. Moreover, the fact that the maximal mar-
gin hyperplane is extremely sensitive to a change in a single observation
suggests that it may have overfit the training data.
In this case, we might be willing to consider a classifier based on a hy-
perplane that does not perfectly separate the two classes, in the interest of
