350
8. Tree-Based Methods
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Number of Trees
Test Classification Error
Boosting: depth=1
Boosting: depth=2
RandomForest: m= p
FIGURE 8.11. Results from performing boosting and random forests on the
15-class gene expression data set in order to predict cancer versus normal. The test
error is displayed as a function of the number of trees. For the two boosted models,
λ = 0.01. Depth-1 trees slightly outperform depth-2 trees, and both outperform
the random forest, although the standard errors are around 0.02, making none of
these differences significant. The test error rate for a single tree is 24 %.
trees are typically sufficient. Using smaller trees can aid in interpretability
as well; for instance, using stumps leads to an additive model.
8.2.4
Bayesian Additive Regression Trees
Finally, we discuss Bayesian additive regression trees (BART), another en- Bayesian
additive
regression
trees
semble method that uses decision trees as its building blocks. For simplicity,
we present BART for regression (as opposed to classification).
Recall that bagging and random forests make predictions from an aver-
age of regression trees, each of which is built using a random sample of data
and/or predictors. Each tree is built separately from the others. By con-
trast, boosting uses a weighted sum of trees, each of which is constructed
by fitting a tree to the residual of the current fit. Thus, each new tree at-
tempts to capture signal that is not yet accounted for by the current set
of trees. BART is related to both approaches: each tree is constructed in
a random manner as in bagging and random forests, and each tree tries to
capture signal not yet accounted for by the current model, as in boosting.
The main novelty in BART is the way in which new trees are generated.
Before we introduce the BART algorithm, we define some notation. We
let K denote the number of regression trees, and B the number of iterations
for which the BART algorithm will be run. The notation ˆf b
k(x) represents
the prediction at x for the kth regression tree used in the bth iteration. At
the end of each iteration, the K trees from that iteration will be summed,
i.e. ˆf b(x) = )K
k=1 ˆf b
k(x) for b = 1, . . . , B.
In the first iteration of the BART algorithm, all trees are initialized to
have a single root node, with ˆf 1
k(x) =
1
nK
)n
i=1 yi, the mean of the response
