8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees
349
Algorithm 8.2 Boosting for Regression Trees
1. Set ˆf(x) = 0 and ri = yi for all i in the training set.
2. For b = 1, 2, . . . , B, repeat:
(a) Fit a tree ˆf b with d splits (d + 1 terminal nodes) to the training
data (X, r).
(b) Update ˆf by adding in a shrunken version of the new tree:
ˆf(x) ←ˆf(x) + λ ˆf b(x).
(8.10)
(c) Update the residuals,
ri ←ri −λ ˆf b(xi).
(8.11)
3. Output the boosted model,
ˆf(x) =
B
0
b=1
λ ˆf b(x).
(8.12)
Boosting has three tuning parameters:
1. The number of trees B. Unlike bagging and random forests, boosting
can overfit if B is too large, although this overfitting tends to occur
slowly if at all. We use cross-validation to select B.
2. The shrinkage parameter λ, a small positive number. This controls
the rate at which boosting learns. Typical values are 0.01 or 0.001, and
the right choice can depend on the problem. Very small λ can require
using a very large value of B in order to achieve good performance.
3. The number d of splits in each tree, which controls the complexity
of the boosted ensemble. Often d = 1 works well, in which case each
tree is a stump, consisting of a single split. In this case, the boosted stump
ensemble is fitting an additive model, since each term involves only a
single variable. More generally d is the interaction depth, and controls interaction
depth
the interaction order of the boosted model, since d splits can involve
at most d variables.
In Figure 8.11, we applied boosting to the 15-class cancer gene expression
data set, in order to develop a classifier that can distinguish the normal
class from the 14 cancer classes. We display the test error as a function of
the total number of trees and the interaction depth d. We see that simple
stumps with an interaction depth of one perform well if enough of them
are included. This model outperforms the depth-two model, and both out-
perform a random forest. This highlights one difference between boosting
and random forests: in boosting, because the growth of a particular tree
takes into account the other trees that have already been grown, smaller
