334
8. Tree-Based Methods
2. For every observation that falls into the region Rj, we make the same
prediction, which is simply the mean of the response values for the
training observations in Rj.
For instance, suppose that in Step 1 we obtain two regions, R1 and R2,
and that the response mean of the training observations in the first region
is 10, while the response mean of the training observations in the second
region is 20. Then for a given observation X = x, if x ∈R1 we will predict
a value of 10, and if x ∈R2 we will predict a value of 20.
We now elaborate on Step 1 above. How do we construct the regions
R1, . . . , RJ? In theory, the regions could have any shape. However, we
choose to divide the predictor space into high-dimensional rectangles, or
boxes, for simplicity and for ease of interpretation of the resulting predic-
tive model. The goal is to find boxes R1, . . . , RJ that minimize the RSS,
given by
J
0
j=1
0
i∈Rj
(yi −ˆyRj)2,
(8.1)
where ˆyRj is the mean response for the training observations within the
jth box. Unfortunately, it is computationally infeasible to consider every
possible partition of the feature space into J boxes. For this reason, we take
a top-down, greedy approach that is known as recursive binary splitting. The recursive
binary
splitting
approach is top-down because it begins at the top of the tree (at which point
all observations belong to a single region) and then successively splits the
predictor space; each split is indicated via two new branches further down
on the tree. It is greedy because at each step of the tree-building process,
the best split is made at that particular step, rather than looking ahead
and picking a split that will lead to a better tree in some future step.
In order to perform recursive binary splitting, we first select the pre-
dictor Xj and the cutpoint s such that splitting the predictor space into
the regions {X|Xj < s} and {X|Xj ≥s} leads to the greatest possible
reduction in RSS. (The notation {X|Xj < s} means the region of predictor
space in which Xj takes on a value less than s.) That is, we consider all
predictors X1, . . . , Xp, and all possible values of the cutpoint s for each of
the predictors, and then choose the predictor and cutpoint such that the
resulting tree has the lowest RSS. In greater detail, for any j and s, we
define the pair of half-planes
R1(j, s) = {X|Xj < s} and R2(j, s) = {X|Xj ≥s},
(8.2)
and we seek the value of j and s that minimize the equation
0
i: xi∈R1(j,s)
(yi −ˆyR1)2 +
0
i: xi∈R2(j,s)
(yi −ˆyR2)2,
(8.3)
where ˆyR1 is the mean response for the training observations in R1(j, s),
and ˆyR2 is the mean response for the training observations in R2(j, s).
Finding the values of j and s that minimize (8.3) can be done quite quickly,
especially when the number of features p is not too large.
Next, we repeat the process, looking for the best predictor and best
cutpoint in order to split the data further so as to minimize the RSS within
