8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees
347
Hence the predictions from the bagged trees will be highly correlated. Un-
fortunately, averaging many highly correlated quantities does not lead to
as large of a reduction in variance as averaging many uncorrelated quan-
tities. In particular, this means that bagging will not lead to a substantial
reduction in variance over a single tree in this setting.
Random forests overcome this problem by forcing each split to consider
only a subset of the predictors. Therefore, on average (p −m)/p of the
splits will not even consider the strong predictor, and so other predictors
will have more of a chance. We can think of this process as decorrelating
the trees, thereby making the average of the resulting trees less variable
and hence more reliable.
The main difference between bagging and random forests is the choice
of predictor subset size m. For instance, if a random forest is built using
m = p, then this amounts simply to bagging. On the Heart data, random
forests using m = √p leads to a reduction in both test error and OOB error
over bagging (Figure 8.8).
Using a small value of m in building a random forest will typically be
helpful when we have a large number of correlated predictors. We applied
random forests to a high-dimensional biological data set consisting of ex-
pression measurements of 4,718 genes measured on tissue samples from 349
patients. There are around 20,000 genes in humans, and individual genes
have different levels of activity, or expression, in particular cells, tissues,
and biological conditions. In this data set, each of the patient samples has
a qualitative label with 15 different levels: either normal or 1 of 14 different
types of cancer. Our goal was to use random forests to predict cancer type
based on the 500 genes that have the largest variance in the training set.
We randomly divided the observations into a training and a test set, and
applied random forests to the training set for three different values of the
number of splitting variables m. The results are shown in Figure 8.10. The
error rate of a single tree is 45.7 %, and the null rate is 75.4 %.4 We see that
using 400 trees is sufficient to give good performance, and that the choice
m = √p gave a small improvement in test error over bagging (m = p) in
this example. As with bagging, random forests will not overfit if we increase
B, so in practice we use a value of B sufficiently large for the error rate to
have settled down.
8.2.3
Boosting
We now discuss boosting, yet another approach for improving the predic- boosting
tions resulting from a decision tree. Like bagging, boosting is a general
approach that can be applied to many statistical learning methods for re-
gression or classification. Here we restrict our discussion of boosting to the
context of decision trees.
Recall that bagging involves creating multiple copies of the original train-
ing data set using the bootstrap, fitting a separate decision tree to each
copy, and then combining all of the trees in order to create a single predic-
4The null rate results from simply classifying each observation to the dominant class
overall, which is in this case the normal class.
