348
8. Tree-Based Methods
0
100
200
300
400
500
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Number of Trees
Test Classification Error
m=p
m=p/2
m= p
FIGURE 8.10. Results from random forests for the 15-class gene expression
data set with p = 500 predictors. The test error is displayed as a function of
the number of trees. Each colored line corresponds to a different value of m, the
number of predictors available for splitting at each interior tree node. Random
forests (m < p) lead to a slight improvement over bagging (m = p). A single
classification tree has an error rate of 45.7 %.
tive model. Notably, each tree is built on a bootstrap data set, independent
of the other trees. Boosting works in a similar way, except that the trees are
grown sequentially: each tree is grown using information from previously
grown trees. Boosting does not involve bootstrap sampling; instead each
tree is fit on a modified version of the original data set.
Consider first the regression setting. Like bagging, boosting involves com-
bining a large number of decision trees, ˆf 1, . . . , ˆf B. Boosting is described
in Algorithm 8.2.
What is the idea behind this procedure? Unlike fitting a single large deci-
sion tree to the data, which amounts to fitting the data hard and potentially
overfitting, the boosting approach instead learns slowly. Given the current
model, we fit a decision tree to the residuals from the model. That is, we
fit a tree using the current residuals, rather than the outcome Y , as the re-
sponse. We then add this new decision tree into the fitted function in order
to update the residuals. Each of these trees can be rather small, with just
a few terminal nodes, determined by the parameter d in the algorithm. By
fitting small trees to the residuals, we slowly improve ˆf in areas where it
does not perform well. The shrinkage parameter λ slows the process down
even further, allowing more and different shaped trees to attack the resid-
uals. In general, statistical learning approaches that learn slowly tend to
perform well. Note that in boosting, unlike in bagging, the construction of
each tree depends strongly on the trees that have already been grown.
We have just described the process of boosting regression trees. Boosting
classification trees proceeds in a similar but slightly more complex way, and
the details are omitted here.
