296
7. Moving Beyond Linearity
7.4.2
Constraints and Splines
The top left panel of Figure 7.3 looks wrong because the fitted curve is just
too flexible. To remedy this problem, we can fit a piecewise polynomial
under the constraint that the fitted curve must be continuous. In other
words, there cannot be a jump when age=50. The top right plot in Figure 7.3
shows the resulting fit. This looks better than the top left plot, but the V-
shaped join looks unnatural.
In the lower left plot, we have added two additional constraints: now both
the first and second derivatives of the piecewise polynomials are continuous derivative
at age=50. In other words, we are requiring that the piecewise polynomial
be not only continuous when age=50, but also very smooth. Each constraint
that we impose on the piecewise cubic polynomials effectively frees up one
degree of freedom, by reducing the complexity of the resulting piecewise
polynomial fit. So in the top left plot, we are using eight degrees of free-
dom, but in the bottom left plot we imposed three constraints (continuity,
continuity of the first derivative, and continuity of the second derivative)
and so are left with five degrees of freedom. The curve in the bottom left
plot is called a cubic spline.3 In general, a cubic spline with K knots uses cubic spline
a total of 4 + K degrees of freedom.
In Figure 7.3, the lower right plot is a linear spline, which is continuous linear spline
at age=50. The general definition of a degree-d spline is that it is a piecewise
degree-d polynomial, with continuity in derivatives up to degree d −1 at
each knot. Therefore, a linear spline is obtained by fitting a line in each
region of the predictor space defined by the knots, requiring continuity at
each knot.
In Figure 7.3, there is a single knot at age=50. Of course, we could add
more knots, and impose continuity at each.
7.4.3
The Spline Basis Representation
The regression splines that we just saw in the previous section may have
seemed somewhat complex: how can we fit a piecewise degree-d polynomial
under the constraint that it (and possibly its first d −1 derivatives) be
continuous? It turns out that we can use the basis model (7.7) to represent
a regression spline. A cubic spline with K knots can be modeled as
yi = β0 + β1b1(xi) + β2b2(xi) + · · · + βK+3bK+3(xi) + ϵi,
(7.9)
for an appropriate choice of basis functions b1, b2, . . . , bK+3. The model
(7.9) can then be fit using least squares.
Just as there were several ways to represent polynomials, there are also
many equivalent ways to represent cubic splines using different choices of
basis functions in (7.9). The most direct way to represent a cubic spline
using (7.9) is to start off with a basis for a cubic polynomial—namely,
x, x2, and x3—and then add one truncated power basis function per knot. truncated
power basis
3Cubic splines are popular because most human eyes cannot detect the discontinuity
at the knots.
