328
7. Moving Beyond Linearity
10. This question relates to the College data set.
(a) Split the data into a training set and a test set. Using out-of-state
tuition as the response and the other variables as the predictors,
perform forward stepwise selection on the training set in order
to identify a satisfactory model that uses just a subset of the
predictors.
(b) Fit a GAM on the training data, using out-of-state tuition as
the response and the features selected in the previous step as
the predictors. Plot the results, and explain your findings.
(c) Evaluate the model obtained on the test set, and explain the
results obtained.
(d) For which variables, if any, is there evidence of a non-linear
relationship with the response?
11. In Section 7.7, it was mentioned that GAMs are generally fit using
a backfitting approach. The idea behind backfitting is actually quite
simple. We will now explore backfitting in the context of multiple
linear regression.
Suppose that we would like to perform multiple linear regression, but
we do not have software to do so. Instead, we only have software
to perform simple linear regression. Therefore, we take the following
iterative approach: we repeatedly hold all but one coefficient esti-
mate fixed at its current value, and update only that coefficient
estimate using a simple linear regression. The process is continued un-
til convergence—that is, until the coefficient estimates stop changing.
We now try this out on a toy example.
(a) Generate a response Y and two predictors X1 and X2, with
n = 100.
(b) Write a function simple_reg() that takes two arguments outcome
and feature, fits a simple linear regression model with this out-
come and feature, and returns the estimated intercept and slope.
(c) Initialize beta1 to take on a value of your choice. It does not
matter what value you choose.
(d) Keeping beta1 fixed, use your function simple_reg() to fit the
model:
Y −beta1 · X1 = β0 + β2X2 + ϵ.
Store the resulting values as beta0 and beta2.
(e) Keeping beta2 fixed, fit the model
Y −beta2 · X2 = β0 + β1X1 + ϵ.
Store the result as beta0 and beta1 (overwriting their previous
values).
(f) Write a for loop to repeat (c) and (d) 1,000 times. Report the
estimates of beta0, beta1, and beta2 at each iteration of the for
loop. Create a plot in which each of these values is displayed,
with beta0, beta1, and beta2.
