7.9 Exercises
327
Applied
6. In this exercise, you will further analyze the Wage data set considered
throughout this chapter.
(a) Perform polynomial regression to predict wage using age. Use
cross-validation to select the optimal degree d for the polyno-
mial. What degree was chosen, and how does this compare to
the results of hypothesis testing using ANOVA? Make a plot of
the resulting polynomial fit to the data.
(b) Fit a step function to predict wage using age, and perform cross-
validation to choose the optimal number of cuts. Make a plot of
the fit obtained.
7. The Wage data set contains a number of other features not explored
in this chapter, such as marital status (maritl), job class (jobclass),
and others. Explore the relationships between some of these other
predictors and wage, and use non-linear fitting techniques in order to
fit flexible models to the data. Create plots of the results obtained,
and write a summary of your findings.
8. Fit some of the non-linear models investigated in this chapter to the
Auto data set. Is there evidence for non-linear relationships in this
data set? Create some informative plots to justify your answer.
9. This question uses the variables dis (the weighted mean of distances
to five Boston employment centers) and nox (nitrogen oxides concen-
tration in parts per 10 million) from the Boston data. We will treat
dis as the predictor and nox as the response.
(a) Use the poly() function from the ISLP.models module to fit a
cubic polynomial regression to predict nox using dis. Report the
regression output, and plot the resulting data and polynomial
fits.
(b) Plot the polynomial fits for a range of different polynomial
degrees (say, from 1 to 10), and report the associated residual
sum of squares.
(c) Perform cross-validation or another approach to select the opti-
mal degree for the polynomial, and explain your results.
(d) Use the bs() function from the ISLP.models module to fit a re-
gression spline to predict nox using dis. Report the output for
the fit using four degrees of freedom. How did you choose the
knots? Plot the resulting fit.
(e) Now fit a regression spline for a range of degrees of freedom, and
plot the resulting fits and report the resulting RSS. Describe the
results obtained.
(f) Perform cross-validation or another approach in order to select
the best degrees of freedom for a regression spline on this data.
Describe your results.
