344
8. Tree-Based Methods
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Number of Trees
Error
Test: Bagging
Test: RandomForest
OOB: Bagging
OOB: RandomForest
FIGURE 8.8. Bagging and random forest results for the Heart data. The test
error (black and orange) is shown as a function of B, the number of bootstrapped
training sets used. Random forests were applied with m = √p. The dashed line
indicates the test error resulting from a single classification tree. The green and
blue traces show the OOB error, which in this case is — by chance — considerably
lower.
This is called bagging.
While bagging can improve predictions for many regression methods,
it is particularly useful for decision trees. To apply bagging to regression
trees, we simply construct B regression trees using B bootstrapped training
sets, and average the resulting predictions. These trees are grown deep,
and are not pruned. Hence each individual tree has high variance, but
low bias. Averaging these B trees reduces the variance. Bagging has been
demonstrated to give impressive improvements in accuracy by combining
together hundreds or even thousands of trees into a single procedure.
Thus far, we have described the bagging procedure in the regression
context, to predict a quantitative outcome Y . How can bagging be extended
to a classification problem where Y is qualitative? In that situation, there
are a few possible approaches, but the simplest is as follows. For a given test
observation, we can record the class predicted by each of the B trees, and
take a majority vote: the overall prediction is the most commonly occurring majority
vote
class among the B predictions.
Figure 8.8 shows the results from bagging trees on the Heart data. The
test error rate is shown as a function of B, the number of trees constructed
using bootstrapped training data sets. We see that the bagging test error
rate is slightly lower in this case than the test error rate obtained from a
single tree. The number of trees B is not a critical parameter with bagging;
using a very large value of B will not lead to overfitting. In practice we
