9.5 Relationship to Logistic Regression
385
classifier. Thus, a small value of λ in (9.25) amounts to a small value of C
in (9.15). Note that the λ )p
j=1 β2
j term in (9.25) is the ridge penalty term
from Section 6.2.1, and plays a similar role in controlling the bias-variance
trade-off for the support vector classifier.
Now (9.25) takes the “Loss + Penalty” form that we have seen repeatedly
throughout this book:
minimize
β0,β1,...,βp {L(X, y, β) + λP(β)} .
(9.26)
In (9.26), L(X, y, β) is some loss function quantifying the extent to which
the model, parametrized by β, fits the data (X, y), and P(β) is a penalty
function on the parameter vector β whose effect is controlled by a nonneg-
ative tuning parameter λ. For instance, ridge regression and the lasso both
take this form with
L(X, y, β) =
n
0
i=1

yi −β0 −
p
0
j=1
xijβj


2
and with P(β) = )p
j=1 β2
j for ridge regression and P(β) = )p
j=1 |βj| for
the lasso. In the case of (9.25) the loss function instead takes the form
L(X, y, β) =
n
0
i=1
max [0, 1 −yi(β0 + β1xi1 + · · · + βpxip)] .
This is known as hinge loss, and is depicted in Figure 9.12. However, it hinge loss
turns out that the hinge loss function is closely related to the loss function
used in logistic regression, also shown in Figure 9.12.
An interesting characteristic of the support vector classifier is that only
support vectors play a role in the classifier obtained; observations on the
correct side of the margin do not affect it. This is due to the fact that the
loss function shown in Figure 9.12 is exactly zero for observations for which
yi(β0 + β1xi1 + · · · + βpxip) ≥1; these correspond to observations that are
on the correct side of the margin.3 In contrast, the loss function for logistic
regression shown in Figure 9.12 is not exactly zero anywhere. But it is very
small for observations that are far from the decision boundary. Due to the
similarities between their loss functions, logistic regression and the support
vector classifier often give very similar results. When the classes are well
separated, SVMs tend to behave better than logistic regression; in more
overlapping regimes, logistic regression is often preferred.
When the support vector classifier and SVM were first introduced, it was
thought that the tuning parameter C in (9.15) was an unimportant “nui-
sance” parameter that could be set to some default value, like 1. However,
the “Loss + Penalty” formulation (9.25) for the support vector classifier
indicates that this is not the case. The choice of tuning parameter is very
important and determines the extent to which the model underfits or over-
fits the data, as illustrated, for example, in Figure 9.7.
3With this hinge-loss + penalty representation, the margin corresponds to the value
one, and the width of the margin is determined by ! β2
j .
