8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees
345
use a value of B sufficiently large that the error has settled down. Using
B = 100 is sufficient to achieve good performance in this example.
Out-of-Bag Error Estimation
It turns out that there is a very straightforward way to estimate the test
error of a bagged model, without the need to perform cross-validation or
the validation set approach. Recall that the key to bagging is that trees are
repeatedly fit to bootstrapped subsets of the observations. One can show
that on average, each bagged tree makes use of around two-thirds of the
observations.3 The remaining one-third of the observations not used to fit a
given bagged tree are referred to as the out-of-bag (OOB) observations. We out-of-bag
can predict the response for the ith observation using each of the trees in
which that observation was OOB. This will yield around B/3 predictions
for the ith observation. In order to obtain a single prediction for the ith
observation, we can average these predicted responses (if regression is the
goal) or can take a majority vote (if classification is the goal). This leads
to a single OOB prediction for the ith observation. An OOB prediction
can be obtained in this way for each of the n observations, from which the
overall OOB MSE (for a regression problem) or classification error (for a
classification problem) can be computed. The resulting OOB error is a valid
estimate of the test error for the bagged model, since the response for each
observation is predicted using only the trees that were not fit using that
observation. Figure 8.8 displays the OOB error on the Heart data. It can
be shown that with B sufficiently large, OOB error is virtually equivalent
to leave-one-out cross-validation error. The OOB approach for estimating
the test error is particularly convenient when performing bagging on large
data sets for which cross-validation would be computationally onerous.
Variable Importance Measures
As we have discussed, bagging typically results in improved accuracy over
prediction using a single tree. Unfortunately, however, it can be difficult to
interpret the resulting model. Recall that one of the advantages of decision
trees is the attractive and easily interpreted diagram that results, such as
the one displayed in Figure 8.1. However, when we bag a large number of
trees, it is no longer possible to represent the resulting statistical learning
procedure using a single tree, and it is no longer clear which variables
are most important to the procedure. Thus, bagging improves prediction
accuracy at the expense of interpretability.
Although the collection of bagged trees is much more difficult to interpret
than a single tree, one can obtain an overall summary of the importance of
each predictor using the RSS (for bagging regression trees) or the Gini index
(for bagging classification trees). In the case of bagging regression trees, we
can record the total amount that the RSS (8.1) is decreased due to splits
over a given predictor, averaged over all B trees. A large value indicates
an important predictor. Similarly, in the context of bagging classification
3This relates to Exercise 2 of Chapter 5.
