366
8. Tree-Based Methods
10. We now use boosting to predict Salary in the Hitters data set.
(a) Remove the observations for whom the salary information is
unknown, and then log-transform the salaries.
(b) Create a training set consisting of the first 200 observations, and
a test set consisting of the remaining observations.
(c) Perform boosting on the training set with 1,000 trees for a range
of values of the shrinkage parameter λ. Produce a plot with
different shrinkage values on the x-axis and the corresponding
training set MSE on the y-axis.
(d) Produce a plot with different shrinkage values on the x-axis and
the corresponding test set MSE on the y-axis.
(e) Compare the test MSE of boosting to the test MSE that results
from applying two of the regression approaches seen in
Chapters 3 and 6.
(f) Which variables appear to be the most important predictors in
the boosted model?
(g) Now apply bagging to the training set. What is the test set MSE
for this approach?
11. This question uses the Caravan data set.
(a) Create a training set consisting of the first 1,000 observations,
and a test set consisting of the remaining observations.
(b) Fit a boosting model to the training set with Purchase as the
response and the other variables as predictors. Use 1,000 trees,
and a shrinkage value of 0.01. Which predictors appear to be
the most important?
(c) Use the boosting model to predict the response on the test data.
Predict that a person will make a purchase if the estimated prob-
ability of purchase is greater than 20 %. Form a confusion ma-
trix. What fraction of the people predicted to make a purchase
do in fact make one? How does this compare with the results
obtained from applying KNN or logistic regression to this data
set?
12. Apply boosting, bagging, random forests, and BART to a data set
of your choice. Be sure to fit the models on a training set and to
evaluate their performance on a test set. How accurate are the results
compared to simple methods like linear or logistic regression? Which
of these approaches yields the best performance?
