380
9. Support Vector Machines
where there are n parameters αi, i = 1, . . . , n, one per training
observation.
• To estimate the parameters α1, . . . , αn and β0, all we need are the
'n
2
(
inner products ⟨xi, xi′⟩between all pairs of training observations.
(The notation
'n
2
(
means n(n −1)/2, and gives the number of pairs
among a set of n items.)
Notice that in (9.18), in order to evaluate the function f(x), we need to
compute the inner product between the new point x and each of the training
points xi. However, it turns out that αi is nonzero only for the support
vectors in the solution—that is, if a training observation is not a support
vector, then its αi equals zero. So if S is the collection of indices of these
support points, we can rewrite any solution function of the form (9.18) as
f(x) = β0 +
0
i∈S
αi⟨x, xi⟩,
(9.19)
which typically involves far fewer terms than in (9.18).2
To summarize, in representing the linear classifier f(x), and in computing
its coefficients, all we need are inner products.
Now suppose that every time the inner product (9.17) appears in the
representation (9.18), or in a calculation of the solution for the support
vector classifier, we replace it with a generalization of the inner product of
the form
K(xi, xi′),
(9.20)
where K is some function that we will refer to as a kernel. A kernel is a kernel
function that quantifies the similarity of two observations. For instance, we
could simply take
K(xi, xi′) =
p
0
j=1
xijxi′j,
(9.21)
which would just give us back the support vector classifier. Equation 9.21
is known as a linear kernel because the support vector classifier is linear
in the features; the linear kernel essentially quantifies the similarity of a
pair of observations using Pearson (standard) correlation. But one could
instead choose another form for (9.20). For instance, one could replace
every instance of )p
j=1 xijxi′j with the quantity
K(xi, xi′) = (1 +
p
0
j=1
xijxi′j)d.
(9.22)
This is known as a polynomial kernel of degree d, where d is a positive polynomial
kernel
integer. Using such a kernel with d > 1, instead of the standard linear
kernel (9.21), in the support vector classifier algorithm leads to a much more
flexible decision boundary. It essentially amounts to fitting a support vector
2By expanding each of the inner products in (9.19), it is easy to see that f(x) is
a linear function of the coordinates of x. Doing so also establishes the correspondence
between the αi and the original parameters βj.
