376
9. Support Vector Machines
We now consider the role of the tuning parameter C. In (9.15), C bounds
the sum of the ϵi’s, and so it determines the number and severity of the vio-
lations to the margin (and to the hyperplane) that we will tolerate. We can
think of C as a budget for the amount that the margin can be violated
by the n observations. If C = 0 then there is no budget for violations to
the margin, and it must be the case that ϵ1 = · · · = ϵn = 0, in which case
(9.12)–(9.15) simply amounts to the maximal margin hyperplane optimiza-
tion problem (9.9)–(9.11). (Of course, a maximal margin hyperplane exists
only if the two classes are separable.) For C > 0 no more than C observa-
tions can be on the wrong side of the hyperplane, because if an observation
is on the wrong side of the hyperplane then ϵi > 1, and (9.15) requires
that )n
i=1 ϵi ≤C. As the budget C increases, we become more tolerant of
violations to the margin, and so the margin will widen. Conversely, as C
decreases, we become less tolerant of violations to the margin and so the
margin narrows. An example is shown in Figure 9.7.
In practice, C is treated as a tuning parameter that is generally chosen via
cross-validation. As with the tuning parameters that we have seen through-
out this book, C controls the bias-variance trade-off of the statistical learn-
ing technique. When C is small, we seek narrow margins that are rarely
violated; this amounts to a classifier that is highly fit to the data, which
may have low bias but high variance. On the other hand, when C is larger,
the margin is wider and we allow more violations to it; this amounts to
fitting the data less hard and obtaining a classifier that is potentially more
biased but may have lower variance.
The optimization problem (9.12)–(9.15) has a very interesting property:
it turns out that only observations that either lie on the margin or that
violate the margin will affect the hyperplane, and hence the classifier ob-
tained. In other words, an observation that lies strictly on the correct side
of the margin does not affect the support vector classifier! Changing the
position of that observation would not change the classifier at all, provided
that its position remains on the correct side of the margin. Observations
that lie directly on the margin, or on the wrong side of the margin for
their class, are known as support vectors. These observations do affect the
support vector classifier.
The fact that only support vectors affect the classifier is in line with our
previous assertion that C controls the bias-variance trade-off of the support
vector classifier. When the tuning parameter C is large, then the margin is
wide, many observations violate the margin, and so there are many support
vectors. In this case, many observations are involved in determining the
hyperplane. The top left panel in Figure 9.7 illustrates this setting: this
classifier has low variance (since many observations are support vectors)
but potentially high bias. In contrast, if C is small, then there will be fewer
support vectors and hence the resulting classifier will have low bias but
high variance. The bottom right panel in Figure 9.7 illustrates this setting,
with only eight support vectors.
The fact that the support vector classifier’s decision rule is based only
on a potentially small subset of the training observations (the support vec-
tors) means that it is quite robust to the behavior of observations that
are far away from the hyperplane. This property is distinct from some of
