7.4 Regression Splines
297
20
30
40
50
60
70
50
100
150
200
250
Age
Wage
Natural Cubic Spline
Cubic Spline
FIGURE 7.4. A cubic spline and a natural cubic spline, with three knots, fit to
a subset of the Wage data. The dashed lines denote the knot locations.
A truncated power basis function is defined as
h(x, ξ) = (x −ξ)3
+ =
K
(x −ξ)3
if x > ξ
0
otherwise,
(7.10)
where ξ is the knot. One can show that adding a term of the form β4h(x, ξ)
to the model (7.8) for a cubic polynomial will lead to a discontinuity in
only the third derivative at ξ; the function will remain continuous, with
continuous first and second derivatives, at each of the knots.
In other words, in order to fit a cubic spline to a data set with K knots, we
perform least squares regression with an intercept and 3 + K predictors, of
the form X, X2, X3, h(X, ξ1), h(X, ξ2), . . . , h(X, ξK), where ξ1, . . . , ξK are
the knots. This amounts to estimating a total of K + 4 regression coeffi-
cients; for this reason, fitting a cubic spline with K knots uses K+4 degrees
of freedom.
Unfortunately, splines can have high variance at the outer range of the
predictors—that is, when X takes on either a very small or very large
value. Figure 7.4 shows a fit to the Wage data with three knots. We see that
the confidence bands in the boundary region appear fairly wild. A natu-
ral spline is a regression spline with additional boundary constraints: the natural
spline
function is required to be linear at the boundary (in the region where X is
smaller than the smallest knot, or larger than the largest knot). This addi-
tional constraint means that natural splines generally produce more stable
estimates at the boundaries. In Figure 7.4, a natural cubic spline is also
displayed as a red line. Note that the corresponding confidence intervals
are narrower.
7.4.4
Choosing the Number and Locations of the Knots
When we fit a spline, where should we place the knots? The regression
spline is most flexible in regions that contain a lot of knots, because in
those regions the polynomial coefficients can change rapidly. Hence, one
