7.5 Smoothing Splines
301
of a function at t, and the second derivative corresponds to the amount by
which the slope is changing. Hence, broadly speaking, the second derivative
of a function is a measure of its roughness: it is large in absolute value if
g(t) is very wiggly near t, and it is close to zero otherwise. (The second
derivative of a straight line is zero; note that a line is perfectly smooth.)
The
M
notation is an integral, which we can think of as a summation over
the range of t. In other words,
M
g′′(t)2dt is simply a measure of the total
change in the function g′(t), over its entire range. If g is very smooth, then
g′(t) will be close to constant and
M
g′′(t)2dt will take on a small value.
Conversely, if g is jumpy and variable then g′(t) will vary significantly and
M
g′′(t)2dt will take on a large value. Therefore, in (7.11), λ
M
g′′(t)2dt en-
courages g to be smooth. The larger the value of λ, the smoother g will be.
When λ = 0, then the penalty term in (7.11) has no effect, and so the
function g will be very jumpy and will exactly interpolate the training
observations. When λ →∞, g will be perfectly smooth—it will just be
a straight line that passes as closely as possible to the training points.
In fact, in this case, g will be the linear least squares line, since the loss
function in (7.11) amounts to minimizing the residual sum of squares. For
an intermediate value of λ, g will approximate the training observations
but will be somewhat smooth. We see that λ controls the bias-variance
trade-off of the smoothing spline.
The function g(x) that minimizes (7.11) can be shown to have some spe-
cial properties: it is a piecewise cubic polynomial with knots at the unique
values of x1, . . . , xn, and continuous first and second derivatives at each
knot. Furthermore, it is linear in the region outside of the extreme knots.
In other words, the function g(x) that minimizes (7.11) is a natural cubic
spline with knots at x1, . . . , xn! However, it is not the same natural cubic
spline that one would get if one applied the basis function approach de-
scribed in Section 7.4.3 with knots at x1, . . . , xn—rather, it is a shrunken
version of such a natural cubic spline, where the value of the tuning pa-
rameter λ in (7.11) controls the level of shrinkage.
7.5.2
Choosing the Smoothing Parameter λ
We have seen that a smoothing spline is simply a natural cubic spline
with knots at every unique value of xi. It might seem that a smoothing
spline will have far too many degrees of freedom, since a knot at each data
point allows a great deal of flexibility. But the tuning parameter λ controls
the roughness of the smoothing spline, and hence the effective degrees of
freedom. It is possible to show that as λ increases from 0 to ∞, the effective effective
degrees of
freedom
degrees of freedom, which we write dfλ, decrease from n to 2.
In the context of smoothing splines, why do we discuss effective degrees
of freedom instead of degrees of freedom? Usually degrees of freedom refer
to the number of free parameters, such as the number of coefficients fit in a
polynomial or cubic spline. Although a smoothing spline has n parameters
and hence n nominal degrees of freedom, these n parameters are heavily
constrained or shrunk down. Hence dfλ is a measure of the flexibility of the
smoothing spline—the higher it is, the more flexible (and the lower-bias but
higher-variance) the smoothing spline. The definition of effective degrees of
