408
10. Deep Learning
of which is a template that determines whether a particular local feature is
present in an image. A convolution filter relies on a very simple operation,
called a convolution, which basically amounts to repeatedly multiplying
matrix elements and then adding the results.
To understand how a convolution filter works, consider a very simple
example of a 4 × 3 image:
Original Image =


a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l

.
Now consider a 2 × 2 filter of the form
Convolution Filter =
3α
β
γ
δ
4
.
When we convolve the image with the filter, we get the result7
Convolved Image =


aα + bβ + dγ + eδ
bα + cβ + eγ + fδ
dα + eβ + gγ + hδ
eα + fβ + hγ + iδ
gα + hβ + jγ + kδ
hα + iβ + kγ + lδ

.
For instance, the top-left element comes from multiplying each element in
the 2 × 2 filter by the corresponding element in the top left 2 × 2 portion
of the image, and adding the results. The other elements are obtained in a
similar way: the convolution filter is applied to every 2×2 submatrix of the
original image in order to obtain the convolved image. If a 2 × 2 submatrix
of the original image resembles the convolution filter, then it will have a
large value in the convolved image; otherwise, it will have a small value.
Thus, the convolved image highlights regions of the original image that
resemble the convolution filter.
We have used 2 × 2 as an example; in
general convolution filters are small ℓ1 × ℓ2 arrays, with ℓ1 and ℓ2 small
positive integers that are not necessarily equal.
Figure 10.7 illustrates the application of two convolution filters to a 192×
179 image of a tiger, shown on the left-hand side.8 Each convolution filter
is a 15 × 15 image containing mostly zeros (black), with a narrow strip
of ones (white) oriented either vertically or horizontally within the image.
When each filter is convolved with the image of the tiger, areas of the tiger
that resemble the filter (i.e. that have either horizontal or vertical stripes or
edges) are given large values, and areas of the tiger that do not resemble the
feature are given small values. The convolved images are displayed on the
right-hand side. We see that the horizontal stripe filter picks out horizontal
stripes and edges in the original image, whereas the vertical stripe filter
picks out vertical stripes and edges in the original image.
7The convolved image is smaller than the original image because its dimension is
given by the number of 2 × 2 submatrices in the original image. Note that 2 × 2 is the
dimension of the convolution filter. If we want the convolved image to have the same
dimension as the original image, then padding can be applied.
8The tiger image used in Figures 10.7–10.9 was obtained from the public domain
image resource https://www.needpix.com/.
