11.7 Additional Topics
487
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Months
Probability of Not Being Published
Low Risk
Medium Risk
High Risk
FIGURE 11.8. For the Publication data introduced in Section 11.5.4, we
compute tertiles of “risk” in the test set using coefficients estimated on the training
set. There is clear separation between the resulting survival curves.
the (possibly-censored) times y1, . . . , yn, as well as the censoring indicators
δ1, . . . , δn.
Therefore, Harrell’s concordance index (or C-index) computes the pro- Harrell’s
concordance
index
portion of observation pairs for which ˆηi′ > ˆηi and yi > yi′:
C =
)
i,i′:yi>yi′ I(ˆηi′ > ˆηi)δi′
)
i,i′:yi>yi′ δi′
,
where the indicator variable I(ˆηi′ > ˆηi) equals one if ˆηi′ > ˆηi, and equals
zero otherwise. The numerator and denominator are multiplied by the sta-
tus indicator δi′, since if the i′th observation is uncensored (i.e. if δi′ = 1),
then yi > yi′ implies that ti > ti′. By contrast, if δi′ = 0, then yi > yi′
does not imply that ti > ti′.
We fit a Cox proportional hazards model on the training set of the
Publication data, and computed the C-index on the test set. This yielded
C = 0.733. Roughly speaking, given two random papers from the test set,
the model can predict with 73.3% accuracy which will be published first.
11.7.2
Choice of Time Scale
In the examples considered thus far in this chapter, it has been fairly clear
how to define time. For example, in the Publication example, time zero for
each paper was defined to be the calendar time at the end of the study,
and the failure time was defined to be the number of months that elapsed
from the end of the study until the paper was published.
However, in other settings, the definitions of time zero and failure time
may be more subtle. For example, when examining the association between
risk factors and disease occurrence in an epidemiological study, one might
use the patient’s age to define time, so that time zero is the patient’s date
of birth. With this choice, the association between age and survival cannot
be measured; however, there is no need to adjust for age in the analysis.
When examining covariates associated with disease-free survival (i.e. the
