11.6 Shrinkage for the Cox Model
485
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Months
Probability of Not Being Published
Negative Result
Positive Result
FIGURE 11.6. For the Publication data, we display survival curves for time
until publication, stratified by whether or not the study produced a positive result,
after adjusting for all other covariates.
sufficiently large value of λ, using a lasso penalty will give some coefficients
that are exactly equal to zero.
We now apply the lasso-penalized Cox model to the Publication data, de-
scribed in Section 11.5.4. We first randomly split the 244 trials into equally-
sized training and test sets. The cross-validation results from the training
set are shown in Figure 11.7. The “partial likelihood deviance”, shown on
the y-axis, is twice the cross-validated negative log partial likelihood; it
plays the role of the cross-validation error.15 Note the “U-shape” of the
partial likelihood deviance: just as we saw in previous chapters, the cross-
validation error is minimized for an intermediate level of model complexity.
Specifically, this occurs when just two predictors, budget and impact, have
non-zero estimated coefficients.
Now, how do we apply this model to the test set? This brings up an
important conceptual point: in essence, there is no simple way to compare
predicted survival times and true survival times on the test set. The first
problem is that some of the observations are censored, and so the true sur-
vival times for those observations are unobserved. The second issue arises
from the fact that in the Cox model, rather than predicting a single sur-
vival time given a covariate vector x, we instead estimate an entire survival
curve, S(t|x), as a function of t.
Therefore, to assess the model fit, we must take a different approach,
which involves stratifying the observations using the coefficient estimates.
In particular, for each test observation, we compute the “risk” score
budgeti · ˆβbudget + impacti · ˆβimpact,
where ˆβbudget and ˆβimpact are the coefficient estimates for these two features
from the training set. We then use these risk scores to categorize the obser-
vations based on their “risk”. For instance, the high risk group consists of
the observations for which budgeti · ˆβbudget + impacti · ˆβimpact is largest; by
15Cross-validation for the Cox model is more involved than for linear or logistic re-
gression, because the objective function is not a sum over the observations.
