10.5 Recurrent Neural Networks
419
this
is
one
of
the
best
films
actually
the
best
I
have
ever
seen
the
film
starts
one
fall
day
One−hot
Embed
FIGURE 10.13. Depiction of a sequence of 20 words representing a single doc-
ument: one-hot encoded using a dictionary of 16 words (top panel) and embedded
in an m-dimensional space with m = 5 (bottom panel).
where each column is indexed by one of the 10,000 words in our dictionary,
and the values in that column give the m coordinates for that word in the
embedding space.
Figure 10.13 illustrates the idea (with a dictionary of 16 rather than
10,000, and m = 5). Where does E come from? If we have a large corpus
of labeled documents, we can have the neural network learn E as part
of the optimization. In this case E is referred to as an embedding layer, embedding
layer
and a specialized E is learned for the task at hand. Otherwise we can
insert a precomputed matrix E in the embedding layer, a process known
as weight freezing. Two pretrained embeddings, word2vec and GloVe, are weight
freezing
word2vec
GloVe
widely used.16 These are built from a very large corpus of documents by
a variant of principal components analysis (Section 12.2). The idea is that
the positions of words in the embedding space preserve semantic meaning;
e.g. synonyms should appear near each other.
So far, so good. Each document is now represented as a sequence of m-
vectors that represents the sequence of words. The next step is to limit
each document to the last L words. Documents that are shorter than L
get padded with zeros upfront. So now each document is represented by a
series consisting of L vectors X = {X1, X2, . . . , XL}, and each Xℓin the
sequence has m components.
We now use the RNN structure in Figure 10.12. The training corpus
consists of n separate series (documents) of length L, each of which gets
processed sequentially from left to right. In the process, a parallel series of
hidden activation vectors Aℓ, ℓ= 1, . . . , L is created as in (10.16) for each
document. Aℓfeeds into the output layer to produce the evolving prediction
Oℓ. We use the final value OL to predict the response: the sentiment of the
review.
16 word2vec is described in Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, and Dean (2013), available
at https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec. GloVe is described in Pennington,
Socher, and Manning (2014), available at https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove.
