420
10. Deep Learning
This is a simple RNN, and has relatively few parameters. If there are K
hidden units, the common weight matrix W has K × (m + 1) parameters,
the matrix U has K × K parameters, and B has 2(K + 1) for the two-class
logistic regression as in (10.15). These are used repeatedly as we process
the sequence X = {Xℓ}L
1 from left to right, much like we use a single
convolution filter to process each patch in an image (Section 10.3.1). If the
embedding layer E is learned, that adds an additional m × D parameters
(D = 10,000 here), and is by far the biggest cost.
We fit the RNN as described in Figure 10.12 and the accompaying text to
the IMDb data. The model had an embedding matrix E with m = 32 (which
was learned in training as opposed to precomputed), followed by a single
recurrent layer with K = 32 hidden units. The model was trained with
dropout regularization on the 25,000 reviews in the designated training
set, and achieved a disappointing 76% accuracy on the IMDb test data. A
network using the GloVe pretrained embedding matrix E performed slightly
worse.
For ease of exposition we have presented a very simple RNN. More elab-
orate versions use long term and short term memory (LSTM). Two tracks
of hidden-layer activations are maintained, so that when the activation Aℓ
is computed, it gets input from hidden units both further back in time,
and closer in time — a so-called LSTM RNN. With long sequences, this LSTM RNN
overcomes the problem of early signals being washed out by the time they
get propagated through the chain to the final activation vector AL.
When we refit our model using the LSTM architecture for the hidden
layer, the performance improved to 87% on the IMDb test data. This is com-
parable with the 88% achieved by the bag-of-words model in Section 10.4.
We give details on fitting these models in Section 10.9.6.
Despite this added LSTM complexity, our RNN is still somewhat “entry
level”. We could probably achieve slightly better results by changing the
size of the model, changing the regularization, and including additional
hidden layers. However, LSTM models take a long time to train, which
makes exploring many architectures and parameter optimization tedious.
RNNs provide a rich framework for modeling data sequences, and they
continue to evolve. There have been many advances in the development
of RNNs — in architecture, data augmentation, and in the learning algo-
rithms. At the time of this writing (early 2020) the leading RNN configura-
tions report accuracy above 95% on the IMDb data. The details are beyond
the scope of this book.17
10.5.2
Time Series Forecasting
Figure 10.14 shows historical trading statistics from the New York Stock
Exchange. Shown are three daily time series covering the period December
3, 1962 to December 31, 1986:18
17An IMDb
leaderboard
can
be
found
at
https://paperswithcode.com/sota/
sentiment-analysis-on-imdb.
18These data were assembled by LeBaron and Weigend (1998) IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks, 9(1): 213–220.
