10.7 Fitting a Neural Network
427
perform as well, they are likely to be easier to fit and understand, and po-
tentially less fragile than the more complex approaches. Wherever possible,
it makes sense to try the simpler models as well, and then make a choice
based on the performance/complexity tradeoff.
Typically we expect deep learning to be an attractive choice when the
sample size of the training set is extremely large, and when interpretability
of the model is not a high priority.
10.7
Fitting a Neural Network
Fitting neural networks is somewhat complex, and we give a brief overview
here. The ideas generalize to much more complex networks. Readers who
find this material challenging can safely skip it. Fortunately, as we see in
the lab at the end of this chapter, good software is available to fit neural
network models in a relatively automated way, without worrying about the
technical details of the model-fitting procedure.
We start with the simple network depicted in Figure 10.1 in Section 10.1.
In model (10.1) the parameters are β = (β0, β1, . . . , βK), as well as each of
the wk = (wk0, wk1, . . . , wkp), k = 1, . . . , K. Given observations (xi, yi), i =
1, . . . , n, we could fit the model by solving a nonlinear least squares problem
minimize
{wk}K
1 , β
1
2
n
0
i=1
(yi −f(xi))2,
(10.23)
where
f(xi) = β0 +
K
0
k=1
βkg
1
wk0 +
p
0
j=1
wkjxij
2
.
(10.24)
The objective in (10.23) looks simple enough, but because of the nested
arrangement of the parameters and the symmetry of the hidden units, it is
not straightforward to minimize. The problem is nonconvex in the param-
eters, and hence there are multiple solutions. As an example, Figure 10.17
shows a simple nonconvex function of a single variable θ; there are two
solutions: one is a local minimum and the other is a global minimum. Fur- local
minimum
global
minimum
thermore, (10.1) is the very simplest of neural networks; in this chapter we
have presented much more complex ones where these problems are com-
pounded. To overcome some of these issues and to protect from overfitting,
two general strategies are employed when fitting neural networks.
• Slow Learning: the model is fit in a somewhat slow iterative fash-
ion, using gradient descent. The fitting process is then stopped when gradient
descent
overfitting is detected.
• Regularization: penalties are imposed on the parameters, usually lasso
or ridge as discussed in Section 6.2.
Suppose we represent all the parameters in one long vector θ. Then we
can rewrite the objective in (10.23) as
R(θ) = 1
2
n
0
i=1
(yi −fθ(xi))2,
(10.25)
