10.3 Convolutional Neural Networks
407
FIGURE 10.6. Schematic showing how a convolutional neural network classifies
an image of a tiger. The network takes in the image and identifies local features.
It then combines the local features in order to create compound features, which in
this example include eyes and ears. These compound features are used to output
the label “tiger”.
axes are spatial (both are 32-dimensional), and the third is the channel channel
axis,5 representing the three colors. There is a designated training set of
50,000 images, and a test set of 10,000.
A special family of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has evolved for convolutional
neural
networks
classifying images such as these, and has shown spectacular success on a
wide range of problems. CNNs mimic to some degree how humans classify
images, by recognizing specific features or patterns anywhere in the image
that distinguish each particular object class. In this section we give a brief
overview of how they work.
Figure 10.6 illustrates the idea behind a convolutional neural network on
a cartoon image of a tiger.6
The network first identifies low-level features in the input image, such
as small edges, patches of color, and the like. These low-level features are
then combined to form higher-level features, such as parts of ears, eyes,
and so on. Eventually, the presence or absence of these higher-level features
contributes to the probability of any given output class.
How does a convolutional neural network build up this hierarchy? It com-
bines two specialized types of hidden layers, called convolution layers and
pooling layers. Convolution layers search for instances of small patterns in
the image, whereas pooling layers downsample these to select a prominent
subset. In order to achieve state-of-the-art results, contemporary neural-
network architectures make use of many convolution and pooling layers.
We describe convolution and pooling layers next.
10.3.1
Convolution Layers
A convolution layer is made up of a large number of convolution filters, each convolution
layer
convolution
filter
5The term channel is taken from the signal-processing literature. Each channel is a
distinct source of information.
6
Thanks
to
Elena
Tuzhilina
for
producing
the
diagram
and
https://www.
cartooning4kids.com/ for permission to use the cartoon tiger.
