10.6 When to Use Deep Learning
425
The RNN we used scanned the document from beginning to end; alter-
native bidirectional RNNs scan the sequences in both directions.
bidirectional
In language translation the target is also a sequence of words, in a
language different from that of the input sequence. Both the input se-
quence and the target sequence are represented by a structure similar to
Figure 10.12, and they share the hidden units. In this so-called Seq2Seq Seq2Seq
learning, the hidden units are thought to capture the semantic meaning
of the sentences. Some of the big breakthroughs in language modeling and
translation resulted from the relatively recent improvements in such RNNs.
Algorithms used to fit RNNs can be complex and computationally costly.
Fortunately, good software protects users somewhat from these complexi-
ties, and makes specifying and fitting these models relatively painless. Many
of the models that we enjoy in daily life (like Google Translate) use state-
of-the-art architectures developed by teams of highly skilled engineers, and
have been trained using massive computational and data resources.
10.6
When to Use Deep Learning
The performance of deep learning in this chapter has been rather impres-
sive. It nailed the digit classification problem, and deep CNNs have really
revolutionized image classification. We see daily reports of new success sto-
ries for deep learning. Many of these are related to image classification
tasks, such as machine diagnosis of mammograms or digital X-ray images,
ophthalmology eye scans, annotations of MRI scans, and so on. Likewise
there are numerous successes of RNNs in speech and language translation,
forecasting, and document modeling. The question that then begs an an-
swer is: should we discard all our older tools, and use deep learning on every
problem with data? To address this question, we revisit our Hitters dataset
from Chapter 6.
This is a regression problem, where the goal is to predict the Salary of
a baseball player in 1987 using his performance statistics from 1986. After
removing players with missing responses, we are left with 263 players and
19 variables. We randomly split the data into a training set of 176 players
(two thirds), and a test set of 87 players (one third). We used three methods
for fitting a regression model to these data.
• A linear model was used to fit the training data, and make predictions
on the test data. The model has 20 parameters.
• The same linear model was fit with lasso regularization. The tuning
parameter was selected by 10-fold cross-validation on the training
data. It selected a model with 12 variables having nonzero coefficients.
• A neural network with one hidden layer consisting of 64 ReLU units
was fit to the data. This model has 1,345 parameters.20
20The model was fit by stochastic gradient descent with a batch size of 32 for 1,000
epochs, and 10% dropout regularization. The test error performance flattened out and
started to slowly increase after 1,000 epochs. These fitting details are discussed in Sec-
tion 10.7.
