11.2 A Closer Look at Censoring
471
0
100
200
300
1
2
3
4
Time in Days
Patient
FIGURE 11.1. Illustration of censored survival data. For patients 1 and 3, the
event was observed. Patient 2 was alive when the study ended. Patient 4 dropped
out of the study.
females who are very sick. Then a comparison of male and female survival
times may wrongly suggest that males survive longer than females.
In general, we need to assume that the censoring mechanism is indepen-
dent: conditional on the features, the event time T is independent of the
censoring time C. The two examples above violate the assumption of inde-
pendent censoring. Typically, it is not possible to determine from the data
itself whether the censoring mechanism is independent. Instead, one has to
carefully consider the data collection process in order to determine whether
independent censoring is a reasonable assumption. In the remainder of this
chapter, we will assume that the censoring mechanism is independent.1
In this chapter, we focus on right censoring, which occurs when T ≥Y ,
i.e. the true event time T is at least as large as the observed time Y .
(Notice that T ≥Y is a consequence of (11.1). Right censoring derives its
name from the fact that time is typically displayed from left to right, as in
Figure 11.1.) However, other types of censoring are possible. For instance,
in left censoring, the true event time T is less than or equal to the observed
time Y . For example, in a study of pregnancy duration, suppose that we
survey patients 250 days after conception, when some have already had
their babies. Then we know that for those patients, pregnancy duration is
less than 250 days. More generally, interval censoring refers to the setting
in which we do not know the exact event time, but we know that it falls
in some interval. For instance, this setting arises if we survey patients once
per week in order to determine whether the event has occurred. While left
censoring and interval censoring can be accommodated using variants of
the ideas presented in this chapter, in what follows we focus specifically on
right censoring.
1The assumption of independent censoring can be relaxed somewhat using the notion
of non-informative censoring; however, the definition of non-informative censoring is too
technical for this book.
