472
11. Survival Analysis and Censored Data
11.3
The Kaplan–Meier Survival Curve
The survival curve, or survival function, is defined as
survival
curve
survival
function
S(t) = Pr(T > t).
(11.2)
This decreasing function quantifies the probability of surviving past time
t. For example, suppose that a company is interested in modeling customer
churn. Let T represent the time that a customer cancels a subscription to
the company’s service. Then S(t) represents the probability that a customer
cancels later than time t. The larger the value of S(t), the less likely that
the customer will cancel before time t.
In this section, we will consider the task of estimating the survival
curve. Our investigation is motivated by the BrainCancer dataset, which
contains the survival times for patients with primary brain tumors un-
dergoing treatment with stereotactic radiation methods.2 The predictors
are gtv (gross tumor volume, in cubic centimeters); sex (male or female);
diagnosis (meningioma, LG glioma, HG glioma, or other); loc (the tumor
location: either infratentorial or supratentorial); ki (Karnofsky index); and
stereo (stereotactic method: either stereotactic radiosurgery or fraction-
ated stereotactic radiotherapy, abbreviated as SRS and SRT, respectively).
Only 53 of the 88 patients were still alive at the end of the study.
Now, we consider the task of estimating the survival curve (11.2) for
these data. To estimate S(20) = Pr(T > 20), the probability that a patient
survives for at least t = 20 months, it is tempting to simply compute the
proportion of patients who are known to have survived past 20 months, i.e.
the proportion of patients for whom Y > 20. This turns out to be 48/88,
or approximately 55%. However, this does not seem quite right, since Y
and T represent different quantities. In particular, 17 of the 40 patients
who did not survive to 20 months were actually censored, and this analysis
implicitly assumes that T < 20 for all of those censored patients; of course,
we do not know whether that is true.
Alternatively, to estimate S(20), we could consider computing the pro-
portion of patients for whom Y > 20, out of the 71 patients who were not
censored by time t = 20; this comes out to 48/71, or approximately 68%.
However, this is not quite right either, since it amounts to completely ig-
noring the patients who were censored before time t = 20, even though the
time at which they are censored is potentially informative. For instance, a
patient who was censored at time t = 19.9 likely would have survived past
t = 20 had he or she not been censored.
We have seen that estimating S(t) is complicated by the presence of
censoring. We now present an approach to overcome these challenges. We
let d1 < d2 < · · · < dK denote the K unique death times among the non-
censored patients, and we let qk denote the number of patients who died
at time dk. For k = 1, . . . , K, we let rk denote the number of patients alive
2This dataset is described in the following paper: Selingerová et al. (2016) Survival
of patients with primary brain tumors: Comparison of two statistical approaches. PLoS
One, 11(2):e0148733.
