11.5 Regression Models With a Survival Response
483
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Months
Probability of Not Being Published
Negative Result
Positive Result
FIGURE 11.5. Survival curves for time until publication for the Publication
data described in Section 11.5.4, stratified by whether or not the study produced
a positive result.
Figure 11.5 shows the Kaplan–Meier curves for the time until publication,
stratified by whether or not the study produced a positive result. We see
slight evidence that time until publication is lower for studies with a positive
result. However, the log-rank test yields a very unimpressive p-value of 0.36.
We now consider a more careful analysis that makes use of all of the
available predictors. The results of fitting Cox’s proportional hazards model
using all of the available features are shown in Table 11.3. We find that the
chance of publication of a study with a positive result is e0.55 = 1.74 times
higher than the chance of publication of a study with a negative result
at any point in time, holding all other covariates fixed. The very small
p-value associated with posres in Table 11.3 indicates that this result is
highly significant. This is striking, especially in light of our earlier finding
that a log-rank test comparing time to publication for studies with positive
versus negative results yielded a p-value of 0.36. How can we explain this
discrepancy? The answer stems from the fact that the log-rank test did not
consider any other covariates, whereas the results in Table 11.3 are based
on a Cox model using all of the available covariates. In other words, after
we adjust for all of the other covariates, then whether or not the study
yielded a positive result is highly predictive of the time to publication.
In order to gain more insight into this result, in Figure 11.6 we display
estimates of the survival curves associated with positive and negative re-
sults, adjusting for the other predictors. To produce these survival curves,
we estimated the underlying baseline hazard h0(t). We also needed to se-
lect representative values for the other predictors; we used the mean value
for each predictor, except for the categorical predictor mech, for which we
used the most prevalent category (R01). Adjusting for the other predictors,
we now see a clear difference in the survival curves between studies with
positive versus negative results.
Other interesting insights can be gleaned from Table 11.3. For example,
studies with a clinical endpoint are more likely to be published at any
given point in time than those with a non-clinical endpoint. The funding
