418
10. Deep Learning
process each element in the sequence, i.e. they are not functions of ℓ. This
is a form of weight sharing used by RNNs, and similar to the use of filters weight
sharing
in convolutional neural networks (Section 10.3.1.) As we proceed from be-
ginning to end, the activations Aℓaccumulate a history of what has been
seen before, so that the learned context can be used for prediction.
For regression problems the loss function for an observation (X, Y ) is
(Y −OL)2,
(10.18)
which only references the final output OL = β0+)K
k=1 βkALk. Thus O1, O2,
. . . , OL−1 are not used. When we fit the model, each element Xℓof the input
sequence X contributes to OL via the chain (10.16), and hence contributes
indirectly to learning the shared parameters W, U and B via the loss
(10.18). With n input sequence/response pairs (xi, yi), the parameters are
found by minimizing the sum of squares
n
0
i=1
(yi−oiL)2 =
n
0
i=1
1
yi−
'
β0+
K
0
k=1
βkg
'
wk0+
p
0
j=1
wkjxiLj+
K
0
s=1
uksai,L−1,s
((22
.
(10.19)
Here we use lowercase letters for the observed yi and vector sequences
xi = {xi1, xi2, . . . , xiL},15 as well as the derived activations.
Since the intermediate outputs Oℓare not used, one may well ask why
they are there at all. First of all, they come for free, since they use the same
output weights B needed to produce OL, and provide an evolving prediction
for the output. Furthermore, for some learning tasks the response is also a
sequence, and so the output sequence {O1, O2, . . . , OL} is explicitly needed.
When used at full strength, recurrent neural networks can be quite com-
plex. We illustrate their use in two simple applications. In the first, we
continue with the IMDb sentiment analysis of the previous section, where
we process the words in the reviews sequentially. In the second application,
we illustrate their use in a financial time series forecasting problem.
10.5.1
Sequential Models for Document Classification
Here we return to our classification task with the IMDb reviews. Our ap-
proach in Section 10.4 was to use the bag-of-words model. Here the plan
is to use instead the sequence of words occurring in a document to make
predictions about the label for the entire document.
We have, however, a dimensionality problem: each word in our document
is represented by a one-hot-encoded vector (dummy variable) with 10,000
elements (one per word in the dictionary)! An approach that has become
popular is to represent each word in a much lower-dimensional embedding embedding
space. This means that rather than representing each word by a binary
vector with 9,999 zeros and a single one in some position, we will represent
it instead by a set of m real numbers, none of which are typically zero. Here
m is the embedding dimension, and can be in the low 100s, or even less.
This means (in our case) that we need a matrix E of dimension m×10,000,
15This is a sequence of vectors; each element xiℓis a p-vector.
