410
10. Deep Learning
• If we use K different convolution filters at this first hidden layer,
we get K two-dimensional output feature maps, which together are
treated as a single three-dimensional feature map. We view each of
the K output feature maps as a separate channel of information, so
now we have K channels in contrast to the three color channels of
the original input feature map. The three-dimensional feature map is
just like the activations in a hidden layer of a simple neural network,
except organized and produced in a spatially structured way.
• We typically apply the ReLU activation function (10.5) to the con-
volved image. This step is sometimes viewed as a separate layer in
the convolutional neural network, in which case it is referred to as a
detector layer.
detector
layer
10.3.2
Pooling Layers
A pooling layer provides a way to condense a large image into a smaller pooling
summary image. While there are a number of possible ways to perform
pooling, the max pooling operation summarizes each non-overlapping 2 × 2
block of pixels in an image using the maximum value in the block. This
reduces the size of the image by a factor of two in each direction, and it
also provides some location invariance: i.e. as long as there is a large value
in one of the four pixels in the block, the whole block registers as a large
value in the reduced image.
Here is a simple example of max pooling:
Max pool


1
2
5
3
3
0
1
2
2
1
3
4
1
1
2
0

→
33
5
2
4
4
.
10.3.3
Architecture of a Convolutional Neural Network
So far we have defined a single convolution layer — each filter produces a
new two-dimensional feature map. The number of convolution filters in a
convolution layer is akin to the number of units at a particular hidden layer
in a fully-connected neural network of the type we saw in Section 10.2.
This number also defines the number of channels in the resulting three-
dimensional feature map. We have also described a pooling layer, which
reduces the first two dimensions of each three-dimensional feature map.
Deep CNNs have many such layers. Figure 10.8 shows a typical architecture
for a CNN for the CIFAR100 image classification task.
At the input layer, we see the three-dimensional feature map of a color
image, where the channel axis represents each color by a 32 × 32 two-
dimensional feature map of pixels. Each convolution filter produces a new
channel at the first hidden layer, each of which is a 32 × 32 feature map
(after some padding at the edges). After this first round of convolutions, we
now have a new “image”; a feature map with considerably more channels
than the three color input channels (six in the figure, since we used six
convolution filters).
