434
10. Deep Learning
infinite number of ways to interpolate n = 20 observations using d = 42 or
d = 80 basis functions, and the smoothest of them — that is, the minimum
norm solution — is much less wild than ˆf20(X)!
In Figure 10.20, we display the training error and test error associated
with ˆfd(X), for a range of values of the degrees of freedom d. We see that
the training error drops to zero once d = 20 and beyond; i.e. once the
interpolation threshold is reached. By contrast, the test error shows a U-
shape for d ≤20, grows extremely large around d = 20, and then shows a
second region of descent for d > 20. For this example the signal-to-noise
ratio — Var(f(X))/σ2 — is 5.9, which is quite high (the data points are
close to the true curve). So an estimate that interpolates the data and does
not wander too far inbetween the observed data points will likely do well.
In Figures 10.20 and 10.21, we have illustrated the double descent phe-
nomenon in a simple one-dimensional setting using natural splines. How-
ever, it turns out that the same phenomenon can arise for deep learning.
Basically, when we fit neural networks with a huge number of parameters,
we are sometimes able to get good results with zero training error. This is
particularly true in problems with high signal-to-noise ratio, such as natural
image recognition and language translation, for example. This is because
the techniques used to fit neural networks, including stochastic gradient
descent, naturally lend themselves to selecting a “smooth” interpolating
model that has good test-set performance on these kinds of problems.
Some points are worth emphasizing:
• The double-descent phenomenon does not contradict the bias-variance
trade-off, as presented in Section 2.2.2. Rather, the double-descent
curve seen in the right-hand side of Figure 10.20 is a consequence of
the fact that the x-axis displays the number of spline basis functions
used, which does not properly capture the true “flexibility” of models
that interpolate the training data. Stated another way, in this exam-
ple, the minimum-norm natural spline with d = 42 has lower variance
than the natural spline with d = 20.
• Most of the statistical learning methods seen in this book do not exhibit
double descent. For instance, regularization approaches typically do
not interpolate the training data, and thus double descent does not
occur. This is not a drawback of regularized methods: they can give
great results without interpolating the data!
In particular, in the examples here, if we had fit the natural splines
using ridge regression with an appropriately-chosen penalty rather
than least squares, then we would not have seen double descent, and
in fact would have obtained better test error results.
• In Chapter 9, we saw that maximal margin classifiers and SVMs that
have zero training error nonetheless often achieve very good test error.
This is in part because those methods seek smooth minimum norm
solutions. This is similar to the fact that the minimum-norm natural
spline can give good results with zero training error.
• The double-descent phenomenon has been used by the machine learn-
ing community to explain the successful practice of using an over-
