11.5 Regression Models With a Survival Response
481
to particular null hypotheses (e.g. H0 : βj = 0), as well as confidence
intervals associated with the coefficients.
Connection With The Log-Rank Test
Suppose we have just a single predictor (p = 1), which we assume to be
binary, i.e. xi ∈{0, 1}. In order to determine whether there is a difference
between the survival times of the observations in the group {i : xi = 0}
and those in the group {i : xi = 1}, we can consider taking two possible
approaches:
Approach #1: Fit a Cox proportional hazards model, and test the
null hypothesis H0 : β = 0. (Since p = 1, β is a scalar.)
Approach #2: Perform a log-rank test to compare the two groups, as
in Section 11.4.
Which one should we prefer?
In fact, there is a close relationship between these two approaches. In
particular, when taking Approach #1, there are a number of possible ways
to test H0. One way is known as a score test. It turns out that in the case of
a single binary covariate, the score test for H0 : β = 0 in Cox’s proportional
hazards model is exactly equal to the log-rank test. In other words, it does
not matter whether we take Approach #1 or Approach #2!
Additional Details
The discussion of Cox’s proportional hazards model glossed over a few
subtleties:
• There is no intercept in (11.14) nor in the equations that follow,
because an intercept can be absorbed into the baseline hazard h0(t).
• We have assumed that there are no tied failure times. In the case
of ties, the exact form of the partial likelihood (11.16) is a bit more
complicated, and a number of computational approximations must
be used.
• (11.16) is known as the partial likelihood because it is not exactly a
likelihood. That is, it does not correspond exactly to the probability
of the data under the assumption (11.14). However, it is a very good
approximation.
• We have focused only on estimation of the coefficients β = (β1, . . . , βp)T .
However, at times we may also wish to estimate the baseline hazard
h0(t), for instance so that we can estimate the survival curve S(t|x) for
an individual with feature vector x. The details are beyond the scope
of this book. Estimation of h0(t) is implemented in the lifelines
package in Python, which we will see in Section 11.8.
