416
10. Deep Learning
the consecutive co-occurrence of every distinct pair of words. “Bliss-
fully long” can be seen as a positive phrase in a movie review, while
“blissfully short” a negative.
• Treat the document as a sequence, taking account of all the words in
the context of those that preceded and those that follow.
In the next section we explore models for sequences of data, which have
applications in weather forecasting, speech recognition, language transla-
tion, and time-series prediction, to name a few. We continue with this IMDb
example there.
10.5
Recurrent Neural Networks
Many data sources are sequential in nature, and call for special treatment
when building predictive models. Examples include:
• Documents such as book and movie reviews, newspaper articles, and
tweets. The sequence and relative positions of words in a document
capture the narrative, theme and tone, and can be exploited in tasks
such as topic classification, sentiment analysis, and language transla-
tion.
• Time series of temperature, rainfall, wind speed, air quality, and so
on. We may want to forecast the weather several days ahead, or cli-
mate several decades ahead.
• Financial time series, where we track market indices, trading volumes,
stock and bond prices, and exchange rates. Here prediction is often
difficult, but as we will see, certain indices can be predicted with
reasonable accuracy.
• Recorded speech, musical recordings, and other sound recordings. We
may want to give a text transcription of a speech, or perhaps a lan-
guage translation. We may want to assess the quality of a piece of
music, or assign certain attributes.
• Handwriting, such as doctor’s notes, and handwritten digits such as
zip codes. Here we want to turn the handwriting into digital text, or
read the digits (optical character recognition).
In a recurrent neural network (RNN), the input object X is a sequence. recurrent
neural
network
Consider a corpus of documents, such as the collection of IMDb movie re-
views. Each document can be represented as a sequence of L words, so
X = {X1, X2, . . . , XL}, where each Xℓrepresents a word. The order of
the words, and closeness of certain words in a sentence, convey semantic
meaning. RNNs are designed to accommodate and take advantage of the
sequential nature of such input objects, much like convolutional neural net-
works accommodate the spatial structure of image inputs. The output Y
can also be a sequence (such as in language translation), but often is a
scalar, like the binary sentiment label of a movie review document.
