9.7 Exercises
397
(a) Generate a data set with n = 500 and p = 2, such that the obser-
vations belong to two classes with a quadratic decision boundary
between them. For instance, you can do this as follows:
rng = np.random.default_rng(5)
x1 = rng.uniform(size=500) - 0.5
x2 = rng.uniform(size=500) - 0.5
y = x1**2 - x2**2 > 0
(b) Plot the observations, colored according to their class labels.
Your plot should display X1 on the x-axis, and X2 on the y-
axis.
(c) Fit a logistic regression model to the data, using X1 and X2 as
predictors.
(d) Apply this model to the training data in order to obtain a pre-
dicted class label for each training observation. Plot the ob-
servations, colored according to the predicted class labels. The
decision boundary should be linear.
(e) Now fit a logistic regression model to the data using non-linear
functions of X1 and X2 as predictors (e.g. X2
1, X1×X2, log(X2),
and so forth).
(f) Apply this model to the training data in order to obtain a pre-
dicted class label for each training observation. Plot the ob-
servations, colored according to the predicted class labels. The
decision boundary should be obviously non-linear. If it is not,
then repeat (a)–(e) until you come up with an example in which
the predicted class labels are obviously non-linear.
(g) Fit a support vector classifier to the data with X1 and X2 as
predictors. Obtain a class prediction for each training observa-
tion. Plot the observations, colored according to the predicted
class labels.
(h) Fit a SVM using a non-linear kernel to the data. Obtain a class
prediction for each training observation. Plot the observations,
colored according to the predicted class labels.
(i) Comment on your results.
6. At the end of Section 9.6.1, it is claimed that in the case of data that is
just barely linearly separable, a support vector classifier with a small
value of C that misclassifies a couple of training observations may
perform better on test data than one with a huge value of C that does
not misclassify any training observations. You will now investigate
this claim.
(a) Generate two-class data with p = 2 in such a way that the classes
are just barely linearly separable.
(b) Compute the cross-validation error rates for support vector
classifiers with a range of C values. How many training obser-
vations are misclassified for each value of C considered, and how
does this relate to the cross-validation errors obtained?
