470
11. Survival Analysis and Censored Data
exceed that number are censored. The survival analysis methods presented
in this chapter could be used to analyze this dataset.
Survival analysis is a very well-studied topic within statistics, due to its
critical importance in a variety of applications, both in and out of medicine.
However, it has received relatively little attention in the machine learning
community.
11.1
Survival and Censoring Times
For each individual, we suppose that there is a true survival time, T, as well survival time
as a true censoring time, C. (The survival time is also known as the failure censoring
time
time or the event time.) The survival time represents the time at which the
failure time
event time
event of interest occurs: for instance, the time at which the patient dies,
or the customer cancels his or her subscription. By contrast, the censoring
time is the time at which censoring occurs: for example, the time at which
the patient drops out of the study or the study ends.
We observe either the survival time T or else the censoring time C.
Specifically, we observe the random variable
Y = min(T, C).
(11.1)
In other words, if the event occurs before censoring (i.e. T < C) then we
observe the true survival time T; however, if censoring occurs before the
event (T > C) then we observe the censoring time. We also observe a status
indicator,
δ =
=
1
if T ≤C
0
if T > C.
Thus, δ = 1 if we observe the true survival time, and δ = 0 if we instead
observe the censoring time.
Now, suppose we observe n (Y, δ) pairs, which we denote as (y1, δ1), . . . ,
(yn, δn). Figure 11.1 displays an example from a (fictitious) medical study
in which we observe n = 4 patients for a 365-day follow-up period. For
patients 1 and 3, we observe the time to event (such as death or disease
relapse) T = ti. Patient 2 was alive when the study ended, and patient 4
dropped out of the study, or was “lost to follow-up”; for these patients we
observe C = ci. Therefore, y1 = t1, y3 = t3, y2 = c2, y4 = c4, δ1 = δ3 = 1,
and δ2 = δ4 = 0.
11.2
A Closer Look at Censoring
In order to analyze survival data, we need to make some assumptions about
why censoring has occurred. For instance, suppose that a number of patients
drop out of a cancer study early because they are very sick. An analysis that
does not take into consideration the reason why the patients dropped out
will likely overestimate the true average survival time. Similarly, suppose
that males who are very sick are more likely to drop out of the study than
