488
11. Survival Analysis and Censored Data
amount of time elapsed between treatment and disease recurrence), one
might use the date of treatment as time zero.
11.7.3
Time-Dependent Covariates
A powerful feature of the proportional hazards model is its ability to handle
time-dependent covariates, predictors whose value may change over time.
For example, suppose we measure a patient’s blood pressure every week
over the course of a medical study. In this case, we can think of the blood
pressure for the ith observation not as xi, but rather as xi(t) at time t.
Because the partial likelihood in (11.16) is constructed sequentially in
time, dealing with time-dependent covariates is straightforward. In partic-
ular, we simply replace xij and xi′j in (11.16) with xij(yi) and xi′j(yi),
respectively; these are the current values of the predictors at time yi. By
contrast, time-dependent covariates would pose a much greater challenge
within the context of a traditional parametric approach, such as (11.13).
One example of time-dependent covariates appears in the analysis of data
from the Stanford Heart Transplant Program. Patients in need of a heart
transplant were put on a waiting list. Some patients received a transplant,
but others died while still on the waiting list. The primary objective of the
analysis was to determine whether a transplant was associated with longer
patient survival.
A naïve approach would use a fixed covariate to represent transplant
status: that is, xi = 1 if the ith patient ever received a transplant, and xi =
0 otherwise. But this approach overlooks the fact that patients had to live
long enough to get a transplant, and hence, on average, healthier patients
received transplants. This problem can be solved by using a time-dependent
covariate for transplant: xi(t) = 1 if the patient received a transplant by
time t, and xi(t) = 0 otherwise.
11.7.4
Checking the Proportional Hazards Assumption
We have seen that Cox’s proportional hazards model relies on the propor-
tional hazards assumption (11.14). While results from the Cox model tend
to be fairly robust to violations of this assumption, it is still a good idea to
check whether it holds. In the case of a qualitative feature, we can plot the
log hazard function for each level of the feature. If (11.14) holds, then the
log hazard functions should just differ by a constant, as seen in the top-left
panel of Figure 11.4. In the case of a quantitative feature, we can take a
similar approach by stratifying the feature.
11.7.5
Survival Trees
In Chapter 8, we discussed flexible and adaptive learning procedures such as
trees, random forests, and boosting, which we applied in both the regression
and classification settings. Most of these approaches can be generalized to
the survival analysis setting. For example, survival trees are a modification survival
trees
of classification and regression trees that use a split criterion that maximizes
