478
11. Survival Analysis and Censored Data
is the probability of surviving at least until time yi. Assuming that the n
observations are independent, the likelihood for the data takes the form
L =
n
E
i=1
f(yi)δiS(yi)1−δi =
n
E
i=1
h(yi)δiS(yi),
(11.13)
where the second equality follows from (11.10).
We now consider the task of modeling the survival times. If we assume ex-
ponential survival, i.e. that the probability density function of the survival
time T takes the form f(t) = λ exp(−λt), then estimating the parameter λ
by maximizing the likelihood in (11.13) is straightforward.9 Alternatively,
we could assume that the survival times are drawn from a more flexible
family of distributions, such as the Gamma or Weibull family. Another
possibility is to model the survival times non-parametrically, as was done
in Section 11.3 using the Kaplan–Meier estimator.
However, what we would really like to do is model the survival time as
a function of the covariates. To do this, it is convenient to work directly
with the hazard function, instead of the probability density function.10
One possible approach is to assume a functional form for the hazard func-
tion h(t|xi), such as h(t|xi) = exp
1
β0 + )p
j=1 βjxij
2
, where the exponent
function guarantees that the hazard function is non-negative. Note that
the exponential hazard function is special, in that it does not vary with
time.11 Given h(t|xi), we could calculate S(t|xi). Plugging these equations
into (11.13), we could then maximize the likelihood in order to estimate the
parameter β = (β0, β1, . . . , βp)T . However, this approach is quite restric-
tive, in the sense that it requires us to make a very stringent assumption
on the form of the hazard function h(t|xi). In the next section, we will
consider a much more flexible approach.
11.5.2
Proportional Hazards
The Proportional Hazards Assumption
The proportional hazards assumption states that
proportional
hazards
assumption
h(t|xi) = h0(t) exp


p
0
j=1
xijβj

,
(11.14)
where h0(t) ≥0 is an unspecified function, known as the baseline hazard. baseline
hazard
It is the hazard function for an individual with features xi1 = · · · = xip =
0. The name “proportional hazards” arises from the fact that the hazard
function for an individual with feature vector xi is some unknown function
9See Exercise 9.
10Given the close relationship between the hazard function h(t) and the density func-
tion f(t) explored in Exercise 8, posing an assumption about the form of the hazard
function is closely related to posing an assumption about the form of the density func-
tion, as was done in the previous paragraph.
11The notation h(t|xi) indicates that we are now considering the hazard function for
the ith observation conditional on the values of the covariates, xi.
