398
9. Support Vector Machines
(c) Generate an appropriate test data set, and compute the test
errors corresponding to each of the values of C considered. Which
value of C leads to the fewest test errors, and how does this
compare to the values of C that yield the fewest training errors
and the fewest cross-validation errors?
(d) Discuss your results.
7. In this problem, you will use support vector approaches in order to
predict whether a given car gets high or low gas mileage based on the
Auto data set.
(a) Create a binary variable that takes on a 1 for cars with gas
mileage above the median, and a 0 for cars with gas mileage
below the median.
(b) Fit a support vector classifier to the data with various values of
C, in order to predict whether a car gets high or low gas mileage.
Report the cross-validation errors associated with different val-
ues of this parameter. Comment on your results. Note you will
need to fit the classifier without the gas mileage variable to pro-
duce sensible results.
(c) Now repeat (b), this time using SVMs with radial and polyno-
mial basis kernels, with different values of gamma and degree and
C. Comment on your results.
(d) Make some plots to back up your assertions in (b) and (c).
Hint: In the lab, we used the plot_svm() function for fitted SVMs.
When p > 2, you can use the keyword argument features to
create plots displaying pairs of variables at a time.
8. This problem involves the OJ data set which is part of the ISLP
package.
(a) Create a training set containing a random sample of 800
observations,
and
a
test
set
containing
the
remaining
observations.
(b) Fit a support vector classifier to the training data using
C = 0.01, with Purchase as the response and the other variables
as predictors. How many support points are there?
(c) What are the training and test error rates?
(d) Use cross-validation to select an optimal C. Consider values in
the range 0.01 to 10.
(e) Compute the training and test error rates using this new value
for C.
(f) Repeat parts (b) through (e) using a support vector machine
with a radial kernel. Use the default value for gamma.
(g) Repeat parts (b) through (e) using a support vector machine
with a polynomial kernel. Set degree = 2.
(h) Overall, which approach seems to give the best results on this
data?
