466
10. Deep Learning
(b) How many parameters are in this model?
(c) Explain how this model can be thought of as an ordinary feed-
forward neural network with the individual pixels as inputs, and
with constraints on the weights in the hidden units. What are
the constraints?
(d) If there were no constraints, then how many weights would there
be in the ordinary feed-forward neural network in (c)?
5. In Table 10.2 on page 426, we see that the ordering of the three
methods with respect to mean absolute error is different from the
ordering with respect to test set R2. How can this be?
Applied
6. Consider the simple function R(β) = sin(β) + β/10.
(a) Draw a graph of this function over the range β ∈[−6, 6].
(b) What is the derivative of this function?
(c) Given β0 = 2.3, run gradient descent to find a local minimum
of R(β) using a learning rate of ρ = 0.1. Show each of β0, β1, . . .
in your plot, as well as the final answer.
(d) Repeat with β0 = 1.4.
7. Fit a neural network to the Default data. Use a single hidden layer
with 10 units, and dropout regularization. Have a look at Labs 10.9.1–
10.9.2 for guidance. Compare the classification performance of your
model with that of linear logistic regression.
8. From your collection of personal photographs, pick 10 images of an-
imals (such as dogs, cats, birds, farm animals, etc.). If the subject
does not occupy a reasonable part of the image, then crop the image.
Now use a pretrained image classification CNN as in Lab 10.9.4 to
predict the class of each of your images, and report the probabilities
for the top five predicted classes for each image.
9. Fit a lag-5 autoregressive model to the NYSE data, as described in
the text and Lab 10.9.6. Refit the model with a 12-level factor repre-
senting the month. Does this factor improve the performance of the
model?
10. In Section 10.9.6, we showed how to fit a linear AR model to the
NYSE data using the LinearRegression() function. However, we also
mentioned that we can “flatten” the short sequences produced for
the RNN model in order to fit a linear AR model. Use this latter
approach to fit a linear AR model to the NYSE data. Compare the test
R2 of this linear AR model to that of the linear AR model that we fit
in the lab. What are the advantages/disadvantages of each approach?
11. Repeat the previous exercise, but now fit a nonlinear AR model by
“flattening” the short sequences produced for the RNN model.
