10.3 Convolutional Neural Networks
409
FIGURE 10.7. Convolution filters find local features in an image, such as edges
and small shapes. We begin with the image of the tiger shown on the left, and
apply the two small convolution filters in the middle. The convolved images high-
light areas in the original image where details similar to the filters are found.
Specifically, the top convolved image highlights the tiger’s vertical stripes, whereas
the bottom convolved image highlights the tiger’s horizontal stripes. We can think
of the original image as the input layer in a convolutional neural network, and
the convolved images as the units in the first hidden layer.
We have used a large image and two large filters in Figure 10.7 for illus-
tration. For the CIFAR100 database there are 32×32 color pixels per image,
and we use 3 × 3 convolution filters.
In a convolution layer, we use a whole bank of filters to pick out a variety
of differently-oriented edges and shapes in the image. Using predefined
filters in this way is standard practice in image processing. By contrast,
with CNNs the filters are learned for the specific classification task. We can
think of the filter weights as the parameters going from an input layer to a
hidden layer, with one hidden unit for each pixel in the convolved image.
This is in fact the case, though the parameters are highly structured and
constrained (see Exercise 4 for more details). They operate on localized
patches in the input image (so there are many structural zeros), and the
same weights in a given filter are reused for all possible patches in the image
(so the weights are constrained).9
We now give some additional details.
• Since the input image is in color, it has three channels represented
by a three-dimensional feature map (array). Each channel is a two-
dimensional (32 × 32) feature map — one for red, one for green, and
one for blue. A single convolution filter will also have three channels,
one per color, each of dimension 3×3, with potentially different filter
weights. The results of the three convolutions are summed to form
a two-dimensional output feature map. Note that at this point the
color information has been used, and is not passed on to subsequent
layers except through its role in the convolution.
9This used to be called weight sharing in the early years of neural networks.
