414
10. Deep Learning
Here is the beginning of a rather amusing negative review:
This has to be one of the worst films of the 1990s. When my
friends & I were watching this film (being the target audience it
was aimed at) we just sat & watched the first half an hour with
our jaws touching the floor at how bad it really was. The rest
of the time, everyone else in the theater just started talking to
each other, leaving or generally crying into their popcorn . . .
Each review can be a different length, include slang or non-words, have
spelling errors, etc. We need to find a way to featurize such a document. featurize
This is modern parlance for defining a set of predictors.
The simplest and most common featurization is the bag-of-words model. bag-of-words
We score each document for the presence or absence of each of the words in
a language dictionary — in this case an English dictionary. If the dictionary
contains M words, that means for each document we create a binary feature
vector of length M, and score a 1 for every word present, and 0 otherwise.
That can be a very wide feature vector, so we limit the dictionary — in
this case to the 10,000 most frequently occurring words in the training
corpus of 25,000 reviews. Fortunately there are nice tools for doing this
automatically. Here is the beginning of a positive review that has been
redacted in this way:
⟨START ⟩this film was just brilliant casting location scenery
story direction everyone’s really suited the part they played and
you could just imagine being there robert ⟨UNK ⟩is an amazing
actor and now the same being director ⟨UNK ⟩father came from
the same scottish island as myself so i loved . . .
Here we can see many words have been omitted, and some unknown words
(UNK) have been marked as such. With this reduction the binary feature
vector has length 10,000, and consists mostly of 0’s and a smattering of 1’s
in the positions corresponding to words that are present in the document.
We have a training set and test set, each with 25,000 examples, and each
balanced with regard to sentiment. The resulting training feature matrix X
has dimension 25,000×10,000, but only 1.3% of the binary entries are non-
zero. We call such a matrix sparse, because most of the values are the same
(zero in this case); it can be stored efficiently in sparse matrix format.14
sparse
matrix
format
There are a variety of ways to account for the document length; here we
only score a word as in or out of the document, but for example one could
instead record the relative frequency of words. We split off a validation set
of size 2,000 from the 25,000 training observations (for model tuning), and
fit two model sequences:
• A lasso logistic regression using the glmnet package;
• A two-class neural network with two hidden layers, each with 16
ReLU units.
14Rather than store the whole matrix, we can store instead the location and values for
the nonzero entries. In this case, since the nonzero entries are all 1, just the locations
are stored.
