10.7 Fitting a Neural Network
431
FIGURE 10.19. Dropout Learning. Left: a fully connected network. Right: net-
work with dropout in the input and hidden layer. The nodes in grey are selected
at random, and ignored in an instance of training.
10.7.3
Dropout Learning
The second row in Table 10.1 is labeled dropout. This is a relatively new dropout
and efficient form of regularization, similar in some respects to ridge reg-
ularization. Inspired by random forests (Section 8.2), the idea is to ran-
domly remove a fraction φ of the units in a layer when fitting the model.
Figure 10.19 illustrates this. This is done separately each time a training
observation is processed. The surviving units stand in for those missing,
and their weights are scaled up by a factor of 1/(1 −φ) to compensate.
This prevents nodes from becoming over-specialized, and can be seen as
a form of regularization. In practice dropout is achieved by randomly set-
ting the activations for the “dropped out” units to zero, while keeping the
architecture intact.
10.7.4
Network Tuning
The network in Figure 10.4 is considered to be relatively straightforward;
it nevertheless requires a number of choices that all have an effect on the
performance:
• The number of hidden layers, and the number of units per layer.
Modern thinking is that the number of units per hidden layer can
be large, and overfitting can be controlled via the various forms of
regularization.
• Regularization tuning parameters. These include the dropout rate φ
and the strength λ of lasso and ridge regularization, and are typically
set separately at each layer.
• Details of stochastic gradient descent. These include the batch size,
the number of epochs, and if used, details of data augmentation (Sec-
tion 10.3.4.)
Choices such as these can make a difference. In preparing this MNIST exam-
ple, we achieved a respectable 1.8% misclassification error after some trial
and error. Finer tuning and training of a similar network can get under
1% error on these data, but the tinkering process can be tedious, and can
result in overfitting if done carelessly.
