412
10. Deep Learning
FIGURE 10.9. Data augmentation. The original image (leftmost) is distorted
in natural ways to produce different images with the same class label. These
distortions do not fool humans, and act as a form of regularization when fitting
the CNN.
zoom, horizontal and vertical shift, shear, small rotations, and in this case
horizontal flips. At face value this is a way of increasing the training set
considerably with somewhat different examples, and thus protects against
overfitting. In fact we can see this as a form of regularization: we build a
cloud of images around each original image, all with the same label. This
kind of fattening of the data is similar in spirit to ridge regularization.
We will see in Section 10.7.2 that the stochastic gradient descent al-
gorithms for fitting deep learning models repeatedly process randomly-
selected batches of, say, 128 training images at a time. This works hand-in-
glove with augmentation, because we can distort each image in the batch
on the fly, and hence do not have to store all the new images.
10.3.5
Results Using a Pretrained Classifier
Here we use an industry-level pretrained classifier to predict the class of
some new images. The resnet50 classifier is a convolutional neural network
that was trained using the imagenet data set, which consists of millions of
images that belong to an ever-growing number of categories.10 Figure 10.10
demonstrates the performance of resnet50 on six photographs (private col-
lection of one of the authors).11 The CNN does a reasonable job classifying
the hawk in the second image. If we zoom out as in the third image, it
gets confused and chooses the fountain rather than the hawk. In the final
image a “jacamar” is a tropical bird from South and Central America with
similar coloring to the South African Cape Weaver. We give more details
on this example in Section 10.9.4.
Much of the work in fitting a CNN is in learning the convolution filters
at the hidden layers; these are the coefficients of a CNN. For models fit to
massive corpora such as imagenet with many classes, the output of these
filters can serve as features for general natural-image classification prob-
lems. One can use these pretrained hidden layers for new problems with
much smaller training sets (a process referred to as weight freezing), and weight
freezing
just train the last few layers of the network, which requires much less data.
10For more information about resnet50, see He, Zhang, Ren, and Sun (2015) “Deep
residual learning for image recognition”, https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385. For de-
tails about imagenet, see Russakovsky, Deng, et al. (2015) “ImageNet Large Scale
Visual Recognition Challenge”, in International Journal of Computer Vision.
11These resnet results can change with time, since the publicly-trained model gets
updated periodically.
