424
10. Deep Learning
of the same series. Fitting a regression of y on M amounts to fitting the
model
ˆvt = ˆβ0 + ˆβ1vt−1 + ˆβ2vt−2 + · · · + ˆβLvt−L,
(10.22)
and is called an order-L autoregressive model, or simply AR(L). For the
NYSE data we can include lagged versions of DJ_return and log_volatility,
rt and zt, in the predictor matrix M, resulting in 3L + 1 columns. An AR
model with L = 5 achieves a test R2 of 0.41, slightly inferior to the 0.42
achieved by the RNN.
Of course the RNN and AR models are very similar. They both use
the same response Y and input sequences X of length L = 5 and dimen-
sion p = 3 in this case. The RNN processes this sequence from left to
right with the same weights W (for the input layer), while the AR model
simply treats all L elements of the sequence equally as a vector of L × p
predictors — a process called flattening in the neural network literature. flattening
Of course the RNN also includes the hidden layer activations Aℓwhich
transfer information along the sequence, and introduces additional nonlin-
earity. From (10.19) with K = 12 hidden units, we see that the RNN has
13 + 12 × (1 + 3 + 12) = 205 parameters, compared to the 16 for the AR(5)
model.
An obvious extension of the AR model is to use the set of lagged predic-
tors as the input vector to an ordinary feedforward neural network (10.1),
and hence add more flexibility. This achieved a test R2 = 0.42, slightly
better than the linear AR, and the same as the RNN.
All the models can be improved by including the variable day_of_week
corresponding to the day t of the target vt (which can be learned from the
calendar dates supplied with the data); trading volume is often higher on
Mondays and Fridays. Since there are five trading days, this one-hot en-
codes to five binary variables. The performance of the AR model improved
to R2 = 0.46 as did the RNN, and the nonlinear AR model improved to
R2 = 0.47.
We used the most simple version of the RNN in our examples here.
Additional experiments with the LSTM extension of the RNN yielded small
improvements, typically of up to 1% in R2 in these examples.
We give details of how we fit all three models in Section 10.9.6.
10.5.3
Summary of RNNs
We have illustrated RNNs through two simple use cases, and have only
scratched the surface.
There are many variations and enhancements of the simple RNN we
used for sequence modeling. One approach we did not discuss uses a one-
dimensional convolutional neural network, treating the sequence of vectors
(say words, as represented in the embedding space) as an image. The con-
volution filter slides along the sequence in a one-dimensional fashion, with
the potential to learn particular phrases or short subsequences relevant to
the learning task.
One can also have additional hidden layers in an RNN. For example,
with two hidden layers, the sequence Aℓis treated as an input sequence to
the next hidden layer in an obvious fashion.
