476
11. Survival Analysis and Censored Data
Therefore, to compute the log-rank test statistic, we simply proceed as
in (11.4), with X = )K
k=1 q1k, making use of (11.5) and (11.7). That is, we
calculate
W =
)K
k=1 (q1k −µk)
G)K
k=1 Var (q1k)
=
)K
k=1
1
q1k −qk
rk r1k
2
G)K
k=1
qk(r1k/rk)(1−r1k/rk)(rk−qk)
rk−1
.
(11.8)
When the sample size is large, the log-rank test statistic W has ap-
proximately a standard normal distribution; this can be used to compute
a p-value for the null hypothesis that there is no difference between the
survival curves in the two groups.6
Comparing the survival times of females and males on the BrainCancer
data gives a log-rank test statistic of W = 1.2, which corresponds to a two-
sided p-value of 0.2 using the theoretical null distribution, and a p-value
of 0.25 using the permutation null distribution with 1,000 permutations.
Thus, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no difference in survival curves
between females and males.
The log-rank test is closely related to Cox’s proportional hazards model,
which we discuss in Section 11.5.2.
11.5
Regression Models With a Survival Response
We now consider the task of fitting a regression model to survival data.
As in Section 11.1, the observations are of the form (Y, δ), where Y =
min(T, C) is the (possibly censored) survival time, and δ is an indicator
variable that equals 1 if T ≤C. Furthermore, X ∈Rp is a vector of p
features. We wish to predict the true survival time T.
Since the observed quantity Y is positive and may have a long right
tail, we might be tempted to fit a linear regression of log(Y ) on X. But
as the reader will surely guess, censoring again creates a problem since
we are actually interested in predicting T and not Y . To overcome this
difficulty, we instead make use of a sequential construction, similar to the
constructions of the Kaplan–Meier survival curve in Section 11.3 and the
log-rank test in Section 11.4.
11.5.1
The Hazard Function
The hazard function or hazard rate — also known as the force of mortality hazard
function
— is formally defined as
h(t) = lim
∆t→0
Pr(t < T ≤t + ∆t|T > t)
∆t
,
(11.9)
6Alternatively, we can estimate the p-value via permutations, using ideas that will
be presented in Section 13.5. The permutation distribution is obtained by randomly
swapping the labels for the observations in the two groups.
