11
Survival Analysis and Censored Data
In this chapter, we will consider the topics of survival analysis and censored survival
analysis
data. These arise in the analysis of a unique kind of outcome variable: the
censored
data
time until an event occurs.
For example, suppose that we have conducted a five-year medical study,
in which patients have been treated for cancer. We would like to fit a model
to predict patient survival time, using features such as baseline health mea-
surements or type of treatment. At first pass, this may sound like a regres-
sion problem of the kind discussed in Chapter 3. But there is an important
complication: hopefully some or many of the patients have survived until
the end of the study. Such a patient’s survival time is said to be censored: we
know that it is at least five years, but we do not know its true value. We do
not want to discard this subset of surviving patients, as the fact that they
survived at least five years amounts to valuable information. However, it is
not clear how to make use of this information using the techniques covered
thus far in this textbook.
Though the phrase “survival analysis” evokes a medical study, the ap-
plications of survival analysis extend far beyond medicine. For example,
consider a company that wishes to model churn, the process by which cus-
tomers cancel subscription to a service. The company might collect data on
customers over some time period, in order to model each customer’s time
to cancellation as a function of demographics or other predictors. However,
presumably not all customers will have canceled their subscription by the
end of this time period; for such customers, the time to cancellation is
censored.
In fact, survival analysis is relevant even in application areas that are
unrelated to time. For instance, suppose we wish to model a person’s weight
as a function of some covariates, using a dataset with measurements for a
large number of people. Unfortunately, the scale used to weigh those people
is unable to report weights above a certain number. Then, any weights that
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_11 
469
