10.9 Lab: Deep Learning
435
parametrized neural network (many layers, and many hidden units),
and then fitting all the way to zero training error. However, fitting
to zero error is not always optimal, and whether it is advisable de-
pends on the signal-to-noise ratio. For instance, we may use ridge
regularization to avoid overfitting a neural network, as in (10.31). In
this case, provided that we use an appropriate choice for the tuning
parameter λ, we will never interpolate the training data, and thus
will not see the double descent phenomenon. Nonetheless we can get
very good test-set performance, likely much better than we would
have achieved had we interpolated the training data. Early stopping
during stochastic gradient descent can also serve as a form of regular-
ization that prevents us from interpolating the training data, while
still getting very good results on test data.
To summarize: though double descent can sometimes occur in neural net-
works, we typically do not want to rely on this behavior. Moreover, it
is important to remember that the bias-variance trade-off always holds
(though it is possible that test error as a function of flexibility may not
exhibit a U-shape, depending on how we have parametrized the notion of
“flexibility” on the x-axis).
10.9
Lab: Deep Learning
In this section we demonstrate how to fit the examples discussed in the
text. We use the Python torch package, along with the pytorch_lightning torch
pytorch_
lightning
package which provides utilities to simplify fitting and evaluating mod-
els. This code can be impressively fast with certain special processors,
such as Apple’s new M1 chip. The package is well-structured, flexible, and
will feel comfortable to Python users. A good companion is the site py-
torch.org/tutorials. Much of our code is adapted from there, as well as the
pytorch_lightning documentation.23
We start with several standard imports that we have seen before.
In [1]: import numpy as np, pandas as pd
from matplotlib.pyplot import subplots
from sklearn.linear_model import \
(LinearRegression ,
LogisticRegression ,
Lasso)
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from sklearn.model_selection import KFold
from sklearn.pipeline import Pipeline
from ISLP import load_data
from ISLP.models import ModelSpec as MS
from sklearn.model_selection import \
(train_test_split ,
GridSearchCV)
23The precise URLs at the time of writing are https://pytorch.org/tutorials/
beginner/basics/intro.html and https://pytorch-lightning.readthedocs.io/en/
latest/.
