32
16
32
8
16
4
32
2
500
100
convolve
convolve
convolve
pool
pool
pool
flatten
8
FIGURE 10.8. Architecture of a deep CNN for the CIFAR100 classification task.
Convolution layers are interspersed with 2 × 2 max-pool layers, which reduce the
size by a factor of 2 in both dimensions.
This is followed by a max-pool layer, which reduces the size of the feature
map in each channel by a factor of four: two in each dimension.
This convolve-then-pool sequence is now repeated for the next two layers.
Some details are as follows:
• Each subsequent convolve layer is similar to the first. It takes as input
the three-dimensional feature map from the previous layer and treats
it like a single multi-channel image. Each convolution filter learned
has as many channels as this feature map.
• Since the channel feature maps are reduced in size after each pool
layer, we usually increase the number of filters in the next convolve
layer to compensate.
• Sometimes we repeat several convolve layers before a pool layer. This
effectively increases the dimension of the filter.
These operations are repeated until the pooling has reduced each channel
feature map down to just a few pixels in each dimension. At this point the
three-dimensional feature maps are flattened — the pixels are treated as
separate units — and fed into one or more fully-connected layers before
reaching the output layer, which is a softmax activation for the 100 classes
(as in (10.13)).
There are many tuning parameters to be selected in constructing such a
network, apart from the number, nature, and sizes of each layer. Dropout
learning can be used at each layer, as well as lasso or ridge regularization
(see Section 10.7). The details of constructing a convolutional neural net-
work can seem daunting. Fortunately, terrific software is available, with
extensive examples and vignettes that provide guidance on sensible choices
for the parameters. For the CIFAR100 official test set, the best accuracy as
of this writing is just above 75%, but undoubtedly this performance will
continue to improve.
10.3.4
Data Augmentation
An additional important trick used with image modeling is data augment- data aug-
mentation
ation. Essentially, each training image is replicated many times, with each
replicate randomly distorted in a natural way such that human recognition
is unaffected. Figure 10.9 shows some examples. Typical distortions are
10.3 Convolutional Neural Networks
411
