10
Deep Learning
This chapter covers the important topic of deep learning. At the time of deep
learning
writing (2020), deep learning is a very active area of research in the machine
learning and artificial intelligence communities. The cornerstone of deep
learning is the neural network.
neural
network
Neural networks rose to fame in the late 1980s. There was a lot of excite-
ment and a certain amount of hype associated with this approach, and they
were the impetus for the popular Neural Information Processing Systems
meetings (NeurIPS, formerly NIPS) held every year, typically in exotic
places like ski resorts. This was followed by a synthesis stage, where the
properties of neural networks were analyzed by machine learners, math-
ematicians and statisticians; algorithms were improved, and the method-
ology stabilized. Then along came SVMs, boosting, and random forests,
and neural networks fell somewhat from favor. Part of the reason was that
neural networks required a lot of tinkering, while the new methods were
more automatic. Also, on many problems the new methods outperformed
poorly-trained neural networks. This was the status quo for the first decade
in the new millennium.
All the while, though, a core group of neural-network enthusiasts were
pushing their technology harder on ever-larger computing architectures and
data sets. Neural networks resurfaced after 2010 with the new name deep
learning, with new architectures, additional bells and whistles, and a string
of success stories on some niche problems such as image and video classifi-
cation, speech and text modeling. Many in the field believe that the major
reason for these successes is the availability of ever-larger training datasets,
made possible by the wide-scale use of digitization in science and industry.
In this chapter we discuss the basics of neural networks and deep learn-
ing, and then go into some of the specializations for specific problems, such
as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for image classification, and re-
current neural networks (RNNs) for time series and other sequences. We
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_10 
399
