432
10. Deep Learning
2
5
10
20
50
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Degrees of Freedom
Error
Training Error
Test Error
FIGURE 10.20. Double descent phenomenon, illustrated using error plots for a
one-dimensional natural spline example. The horizontal axis refers to the number
of spline basis functions on the log scale. The training error hits zero when the
degrees of freedom coincides with the sample size n = 20, the “interpolation
threshold”, and remains zero thereafter. The test error increases dramatically
at this threshold, but then descends again to a reasonable value before finally
increasing again.
10.8
Interpolation and Double Descent
Throughout this book, we have repeatedly discussed the bias-variance trade-
off, first presented in Section 2.2.2. This trade-off indicates that statistical
learning methods tend to perform the best, in terms of test-set error, for an
intermediate level of model complexity. In particular, if we plot “flexibil-
ity” on the x-axis and error on the y-axis, then we generally expect to see
that test error has a U-shape, whereas training error decreases monotoni-
cally. Two “typical” examples of this behavior can be seen in the right-hand
panel of Figure 2.9 on page 29, and in Figure 2.17 on page 39. One implica-
tion of the bias-variance trade-off is that it is generally not a good idea to
interpolate the training data — that is, to get zero training error — since interpolate
that will often result in very high test error.
However, it turns out that in certain specific settings it can be possible for
a statistical learning method that interpolates the training data to perform
well — or at least, better than a slightly less complex model that does not
quite interpolate the data. This phenomenon is known as double descent,
and is displayed in Figure 10.20. “Double descent” gets its name from the
fact that the test error has a U-shape before the interpolation threshold is
reached, and then it descends again (for a while, at least) as an increasingly
flexible model is fit.
We now describe the set-up that resulted in Figure 10.20. We simulated
n = 20 observations from the model
Y = sin(X) + ϵ,
where X ∼U[−5, 5] (uniform distribution), and ϵ ∼N(0, σ2) with σ = 0.3.
We then fit a natural spline to the data, as described in Section 7.4, with d
