10.2 Multilayer Neural Networks
403
FIGURE 10.3. Examples of handwritten digits from the MNIST corpus. Each
grayscale image has 28 × 28 pixels, each of which is an eight-bit number (0–255)
which represents how dark that pixel is. The first 3, 5, and 8 are enlarged to show
their 784 individual pixel values.
the relative amount of the written digit in that tiny square.2 These pixels
are stored in the input vector X (in, say, column order). The output is
the class label, represented by a vector Y = (Y0, Y1, . . . , Y9) of 10 dummy
variables, with a one in the position corresponding to the label, and zeros
elsewhere. In the machine learning community, this is known as one-hot
encoding. There are 60,000 training images, and 10,000 test images.
one-hot
encoding
On a historical note, digit recognition problems were the catalyst that
accelerated the development of neural network technology in the late 1980s
at AT&T Bell Laboratories and elsewhere. Pattern recognition tasks of this
kind are relatively simple for humans. Our visual system occupies a large
fraction of our brains, and good recognition is an evolutionary force for
survival. These tasks are not so simple for machines, and it has taken more
than 30 years to refine the neural-network architectures to match human
performance.
Figure 10.4 shows a multilayer network architecture that works well for
solving the digit-classification task. It differs from Figure 10.1 in several
ways:
• It has two hidden layers L1 (256 units) and L2 (128 units) rather
than one. Later we will see a network with seven hidden layers.
• It has ten output variables, rather than one. In this case the ten vari-
ables really represent a single qualitative variable and so are quite
dependent. (We have indexed them by the digit class 0–9 rather than
1–10, for clarity.) More generally, in multi-task learning one can pre- multi-task
learning
dict different responses simultaneously with a single network; they
all have a say in the formation of the hidden layers.
• The loss function used for training the network is tailored for the
multiclass classification task.
2In the analog-to-digital conversion process, only part of the written numeral may
fall in the square representing a particular pixel.
