12.4 Clustering Methods
521
• PCA looks to find a low-dimensional representation of the observa-
tions that explain a good fraction of the variance;
• Clustering looks to find homogeneous subgroups among the observa-
tions.
Another application of clustering arises in marketing. We may have ac-
cess to a large number of measurements (e.g. median household income,
occupation, distance from nearest urban area, and so forth) for a large
number of people. Our goal is to perform market segmentation by identify-
ing subgroups of people who might be more receptive to a particular form
of advertising, or more likely to purchase a particular product. The task of
performing market segmentation amounts to clustering the people in the
data set.
Since clustering is popular in many fields, there exist a great num-
ber of clustering methods. In this section we focus on perhaps the two
best-known clustering approaches: K-means clustering and hierarchical K-means
clustering
clustering. In K-means clustering, we seek to partition the observations
hierarchical
clustering
into a pre-specified number of clusters. On the other hand, in hierarchical
clustering, we do not know in advance how many clusters we want; in fact,
we end up with a tree-like visual representation of the observations, called
a dendrogram, that allows us to view at once the clusterings obtained for dendrogram
each possible number of clusters, from 1 to n. There are advantages and
disadvantages to each of these clustering approaches, which we highlight in
this chapter.
In general, we can cluster observations on the basis of the features in
order to identify subgroups among the observations, or we can cluster fea-
tures on the basis of the observations in order to discover subgroups among
the features. In what follows, for simplicity we will discuss clustering obser-
vations on the basis of the features, though the converse can be performed
by simply transposing the data matrix.
12.4.1
K-Means Clustering
K-means clustering is a simple and elegant approach for partitioning a
data set into K distinct, non-overlapping clusters. To perform K-means
clustering, we must first specify the desired number of clusters K; then the
K-means algorithm will assign each observation to exactly one of the K
clusters. Figure 12.7 shows the results obtained from performing K-means
clustering on a simulated example consisting of 150 observations in two
dimensions, using three different values of K.
The K-means clustering procedure results from a simple and intuitive
mathematical problem. We begin by defining some notation. Let C1, . . . , CK
denote sets containing the indices of the observations in each cluster. These
sets satisfy two properties:
1. C1 ∪C2 ∪· · · ∪CK = {1, . . . , n}. In other words, each observation
belongs to at least one of the K clusters.
2. Ck ∩Ck′ = ∅for all k̸ = k′. In other words, the clusters are non-
overlapping: no observation belongs to more than one cluster.
