13
Multiple Testing
Thus far, this textbook has mostly focused on estimation and its close
cousin, prediction. In this chapter, we instead focus on hypothesis testing,
which is key to conducting inference. We remind the reader that inference
was briefly discussed in Chapter 2.
While Section 13.1 provides a brief review of null hypotheses, p-values,
test statistics, and other key ideas in hypothesis testing, this chapter as-
sumes that the reader has had previous exposure to these topics. In par-
ticular, we will not focus on why or how to conduct a hypothesis test — a
topic on which entire books can be (and have been) written! Instead, we
will assume that the reader is interested in testing some particular set of
null hypotheses, and has a specific plan in mind for how to conduct the
tests and obtain p-values.
Much of the emphasis in classical statistics focuses on testing a single null
hypothesis, such as H0: the expected blood pressure of mice in the control
group equals the expected blood pressure of mice in the treatment group. Of
course, we would probably like to discover that there is a difference between
the mean blood pressure in the two groups. But for reasons that will become
clear, we construct a null hypothesis corresponding to no difference.
In contemporary settings, we are often faced with huge amounts of
data, and consequently may wish to test a great many null hypotheses.
For instance, rather than simply testing H0, we might want to test m
null hypotheses, H01, . . . , H0m, where H0j: the expected value of the jth
biomarker among mice in the control group equals the expected value of the
jth biomarker among mice in the treatment group. When conducting mul-
tiple testing, we need to be very careful about how we interpret the results,
in order to avoid erroneously rejecting far too many null hypotheses.
This chapter discusses classical as well as more contemporary ways to
conduct multiple testing in a big-data setting. In Section 13.2, we highlight
the challenges associated with multiple testing. Classical solutions to these
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_13 
557
