568
13. Multiple Testing
so this procedure controls the FWER at level α. For instance, in order to
control the FWER at level 0.1 while testing m = 100 null hypotheses, the
Bonferroni procedure requires us to control the Type I error for each null
hypothesis at level 0.1/100 = 0.001, i.e. to reject all null hypotheses for
which the p-value is below 0.001.
We now consider the Fund dataset in Table 13.3. If we control the Type
I error at level α = 0.05 for each fund manager separately, then we will
conclude that the first and third managers have significantly non-zero ex-
cess returns; in other words, we will reject H01 : µ1 = 0 and H03 : µ3 = 0.
However, as discussed in previous sections, this procedure does not account
for the fact that we have tested multiple hypotheses, and therefore it will
lead to a FWER greater than 0.05. If we instead wish to control the FWER
at level 0.05, then, using a Bonferroni correction, we must control the Type
I error for each individual manager at level α/m = 0.05/5 = 0.01. Conse-
quently, we will reject the null hypothesis only for the first manager, since
the p-values for all other managers exceed 0.01. The Bonferroni correction
gives us peace of mind that we have not falsely rejected too many null
hypotheses, but for a price: we reject few null hypotheses, and thus will
typically make quite a few Type II errors.
The Bonferroni correction is by far the best-known and most commonly-
used multiplicity correction in all of statistics. Its ubiquity is due in large
part to the fact that it is very easy to understand and simple to implement,
and also from the fact that it successfully controls Type I error regardless
of whether the m hypothesis tests are independent. However, as we will see,
it is typically neither the most powerful nor the best approach for multiple
testing correction. In particular, the Bonferroni correction can be quite
conservative, in the sense that the true FWER is often quite a bit lower
than the nominal (or target) FWER; this results from the inequality in
(13.6). By contrast, a less conservative procedure might allow us to control
the FWER while rejecting more null hypotheses, and therefore making
fewer Type II errors.
Holm’s Step-Down Procedure
Holm’s method, also known as Holm’s step-down procedure or the Holm– Holm’s
method
Bonferroni method, is an alternative to the Bonferroni procedure. Holm’s
method controls the FWER, but it is less conservative than Bonferroni, in
the sense that it will reject more null hypotheses, typically resulting in fewer
Type II errors and hence greater power. The procedure is summarized in
Algorithm 13.1. The proof that this method controls the FWER is similar
to, but slightly more complicated than, the argument in (13.6) that the
Bonferroni method controls the FWER. It is worth noting that in Holm’s
procedure, the threshold that we use to reject each null hypothesis — p(L)
in Step 5 — actually depends on the values of all m of the p-values. (See the
definition of L in (13.7).) This is in contrast to the Bonferroni procedure,
in which to control the FWER at level α, we reject any null hypotheses for
which the p-value is below α/m, regardless of the other p-values. Holm’s
method makes no independence assumptions about the m hypothesis tests,
and is uniformly more powerful than the Bonferroni method — it will
