534
12. Unsupervised Learning
Socks
Computers
0
2
4
6
8
10
Socks
Computers
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Socks
Computers
0
500
1000
1500
FIGURE 12.16. An eclectic online retailer sells two items: socks and computers.
Left: the number of pairs of socks, and computers, purchased by eight online shop-
pers is displayed. Each shopper is shown in a different color. If inter-observation
dissimilarities are computed using Euclidean distance on the raw variables, then
the number of socks purchased by an individual will drive the dissimilarities ob-
tained, and the number of computers purchased will have little effect. This might
be undesirable, since (1) computers are more expensive than socks and so the
online retailer may be more interested in encouraging shoppers to buy computers
than socks, and (2) a large difference in the number of socks purchased by two
shoppers may be less informative about the shoppers’ overall shopping preferences
than a small difference in the number of computers purchased. Center: the same
data are shown, after scaling each variable by its standard deviation. Now the
two products will have a comparable effect on the inter-observation dissimilarities
obtained. Right: the same data are displayed, but now the y-axis represents the
number of dollars spent by each online shopper on socks and on computers. Since
computers are much more expensive than socks, now computer purchase history
will drive the inter-observation dissimilarities obtained.
evidence for the cluster than one would expect due to chance. However,
there has been no consensus on a single best approach. More details can
be found in ESL.8
Other Considerations in Clustering
Both K-means and hierarchical clustering will assign each observation to
a cluster. However, sometimes this might not be appropriate. For instance,
suppose that most of the observations truly belong to a small number of
(unknown) subgroups, and a small subset of the observations are quite
different from each other and from all other observations. Then since K-
means and hierarchical clustering force every observation into a cluster, the
clusters found may be heavily distorted due to the presence of outliers that
do not belong to any cluster. Mixture models are an attractive approach
for accommodating the presence of such outliers. These amount to a soft
version of K-means clustering, and are described in ESL.
8ESL: The Elements of Statistical Learning by Hastie, Tibshirani and Friedman.
