514
12. Unsupervised Learning
Uniqueness of the Principal Components
While in theory the principal components need not be unique, in almost all
practical settings they are (up to sign flips). This means that two different
software packages will yield the same principal component loading vectors,
although the signs of those loading vectors may differ. The signs may differ
because each principal component loading vector specifies a direction in p-
dimensional space: flipping the sign has no effect as the direction does not
change. (Consider Figure 6.14—the principal component loading vector is
a line that extends in either direction, and flipping its sign would have no
effect.) Similarly, the score vectors are unique up to a sign flip, since the
variance of Z is the same as the variance of −Z. It is worth noting that
when we use (12.5) to approximate xij we multiply zim by φjm. Hence, if
the sign is flipped on both the loading and score vectors, the final product
of the two quantities is unchanged.
Deciding How Many Principal Components to Use
In general, an n × p data matrix X has min(n −1, p) distinct principal
components. However, we usually are not interested in all of them; rather,
we would like to use just the first few principal components in order to
visualize or interpret the data. In fact, we would like to use the smallest
number of principal components required to get a good understanding of the
data. How many principal components are needed? Unfortunately, there is
no single (or simple!) answer to this question.
We typically decide on the number of principal components required
to visualize the data by examining a scree plot, such as the one shown
in the left-hand panel of Figure 12.3. We choose the smallest number of
principal components that are required in order to explain a sizable amount
of the variation in the data. This is done by eyeballing the scree plot, and
looking for a point at which the proportion of variance explained by each
subsequent principal component drops off. This drop is often referred to
as an elbow in the scree plot. For instance, by inspection of Figure 12.3,
one might conclude that a fair amount of variance is explained by the first
two principal components, and that there is an elbow after the second
component. After all, the third principal component explains less than ten
percent of the variance in the data, and the fourth principal component
explains less than half that and so is essentially worthless.
However, this type of visual analysis is inherently ad hoc. Unfortunately,
there is no well-accepted objective way to decide how many principal com-
ponents are enough. In fact, the question of how many principal compo-
nents are enough is inherently ill-defined, and will depend on the specific
area of application and the specific data set. In practice, we tend to look
at the first few principal components in order to find interesting patterns
in the data. If no interesting patterns are found in the first few principal
components, then further principal components are unlikely to be of inter-
est. Conversely, if the first few principal components are interesting, then
we typically continue to look at subsequent principal components until no
further interesting patterns are found. This is admittedly a subjective ap-
