12.6 Exercises
553
(e) It is mentioned in this chapter that at each fusion in the den-
drogram, the position of the two clusters being fused can be
swapped without changing the meaning of the dendrogram. Draw
a dendrogram that is equivalent to the dendrogram in (a), for
which two or more of the leaves are repositioned, but for which
the meaning of the dendrogram is the same.
3. In this problem, you will perform K-means clustering manually, with
K = 2, on a small example with n = 6 observations and p = 2
features. The observations are as follows.
Obs.
X1
X2
1
1
4
2
1
3
3
0
4
4
5
1
5
6
2
6
4
0
(a) Plot the observations.
(b) Randomly assign a cluster label to each observation. You can use
the np.random.choice() function to do this. Report the cluster
labels for each observation.
(c) Compute the centroid for each cluster.
(d) Assign each observation to the centroid to which it is closest, in
terms of Euclidean distance. Report the cluster labels for each
observation.
(e) Repeat (c) and (d) until the answers obtained stop changing.
(f) In your plot from (a), color the observations according to the
cluster labels obtained.
4. Suppose that for a particular data set, we perform hierarchical clus-
tering using single linkage and using complete linkage. We obtain two
dendrograms.
(a) At a certain point on the single linkage dendrogram, the clus-
ters {1, 2, 3} and {4, 5} fuse. On the complete linkage dendro-
gram, the clusters {1, 2, 3} and {4, 5} also fuse at a certain point.
Which fusion will occur higher on the tree, or will they fuse at
the same height, or is there not enough information to tell?
(b) At a certain point on the single linkage dendrogram, the clusters
{5} and {6} fuse. On the complete linkage dendrogram, the clus-
ters {5} and {6} also fuse at a certain point. Which fusion will
occur higher on the tree, or will they fuse at the same height, or
is there not enough information to tell?
5. In words, describe the results that you would expect if you performed
K-means clustering of the eight shoppers in Figure 12.16, on the
basis of their sock and computer purchases, with K = 2. Give three
answers, one for each of the variable scalings displayed. Explain.
