13.2 The Challenge of Multiple Testing
563
Table 13.1 summarizes the possible scenarios associated with testing the
null hypothesis H0.10 Once the hypothesis test is performed, the row of the
table is known (based on whether or not we have rejected H0); however, it
is impossible for us to know which column we are in. If we reject H0 when
H0 is false (i.e., when Ha is true), or if we do not reject H0 when it is true,
then we arrived at the correct result. However, if we erroneously reject H0
when H0 is in fact true, then we have committed a Type I error. The Type I Type I error
error rate is defined as the probability of making a Type I error given that Type I error
rate
H0 holds, i.e., the probability of incorrectly rejecting H0. Alternatively, if
we do not reject H0 when H0 is in fact false, then we have committed a
Type II error. The power of the hypothesis test is defined as the probability Type II
error
power
of not making a Type II error given that Ha holds, i.e., the probability of
correctly rejecting H0.
Ideally we would like both the Type I and Type II error rates to be small.
But in practice, this is hard to achieve! There typically is a trade-off: we
can make the Type I error small by only rejecting H0 if we are quite sure
that it doesn’t hold; however, this will result in an increase in the Type II
error. Alternatively, we can make the Type II error small by rejecting H0
in the presence of even modest evidence that it does not hold, but this will
cause the Type I error to be large. In practice, we typically view Type I
errors as more “serious” than Type II errors, because the former involves
declaring a scientific finding that is not correct. Hence, when we perform
hypothesis testing, we typically require a low Type I error rate — e.g.,
at most α = 0.05 — while trying to make the Type II error small (or,
equivalently, the power large).
It turns out that there is a direct correspondence between the p-value
threshold that causes us to reject H0, and the Type I error rate. By only
rejecting H0 when the p-value is below α, we ensure that the Type I error
rate will be less than or equal to α.
13.2
The Challenge of Multiple Testing
In the previous section, we saw that rejecting H0 if the p-value is below
(say) 0.01 provides us with a simple way to control the Type I error for H0
at level 0.01: if H0 is true, then there is no more than a 1% probability that
we will reject it. But now suppose that we wish to test m null hypotheses,
H01, . . . , H0m. Will it do to simply reject all null hypotheses for which the
corresponding p-value falls below (say) 0.01? Stated another way, if we
reject all null hypotheses for which the p-value falls below 0.01, then how
many Type I errors should we expect to make?
As a first step towards answering this question, consider a stockbroker
who wishes to drum up new clients by convincing them of her trading
10There are parallels between Table 13.1 and Table 4.6, which has to do with the
output of a binary classifier. In particular, recall from Table 4.6 that a false positive
results from predicting a positive (non-null) label when the true label is in fact negative
(null). This is closely related to a Type I error, which results from rejecting the null
hypothesis when in fact the null hypothesis holds.
