554
12. Unsupervised Learning
6. We saw in Section 12.2.2 that the principal component loading and
score vectors provide an approximation to a matrix, in the sense of
(12.5). Specifically, the principal component score and loading vectors
solve the optimization problem given in (12.6).
Now, suppose that the M principal component score vectors zim, m =
1, . . . , M, are known. Using (12.6), explain that each of the first M
principal component loading vectors φjm, m = 1, . . . , M, can be ob-
tained by performing p separate least squares linear regressions. In
each regression, the principal component score vectors are the pre-
dictors, and one of the features of the data matrix is the response.
Applied
7. In this chapter, we mentioned the use of correlation-based distance
and Euclidean distance as dissimilarity measures for hierarchical clus-
tering. It turns out that these two measures are almost equivalent: if
each observation has been centered to have mean zero and standard
deviation one, and if we let rij denote the correlation between the ith
and jth observations, then the quantity 1 −rij is proportional to the
squared Euclidean distance between the ith and jth observations.
On the USArrests data, show that this proportionality holds.
Hint:
The
Euclidean
distance
can
be
calculated
using
the
pairwise_distances() function from the sklearn.metrics module, and pairwise_
distances()
correlations can be calculated using the np.corrcoef() function.
8. In Section 12.2.3, a formula for calculating PVE was given in Equa-
tion 12.10. We also saw that the PVE can be obtained using the
explained_variance_ratio_ attribute of a fitted PCA() estimator.
On the USArrests data, calculate PVE in two ways:
(a) Using the explained_variance_ratio_ output of the fitted PCA()
estimator, as was done in Section 12.2.3.
(b) By applying Equation 12.10 directly. The loadings are stored
as the components_ attribute of the fitted PCA() estimator. Use
those loadings in Equation 12.10 to obtain the PVE.
These two approaches should give the same results.
Hint: You will only obtain the same results in (a) and (b) if the same
data is used in both cases. For instance, if in (a) you performed PCA()
using centered and scaled variables, then you must center and scale
the variables before applying Equation 12.10 in (b).
9. Consider the USArrests data. We will now perform hierarchical clus-
tering on the states.
(a) Using
hierarchical
clustering
with
complete
linkage
and
Euclidean distance, cluster the states.
(b) Cut the dendrogram at a height that results in three distinct
clusters. Which states belong to which clusters?
