504
12. Unsupervised Learning
understanding of how to assess the quality of the results obtained (using
cross-validation, validation on an independent test set, and so forth).
In contrast, unsupervised learning is often much more challenging. The
exercise tends to be more subjective, and there is no simple goal for the
analysis, such as prediction of a response. Unsupervised learning is often
performed as part of an exploratory data analysis. Furthermore, it can be exploratory
data
analysis
hard to assess the results obtained from unsupervised learning methods,
since there is no universally accepted mechanism for performing cross-
validation or validating results on an independent data set. The reason
for this difference is simple. If we fit a predictive model using a supervised
learning technique, then it is possible to check our work by seeing how
well our model predicts the response Y on observations not used in fitting
the model. However, in unsupervised learning, there is no way to check our
work because we don’t know the true answer—the problem is unsupervised.
Techniques for unsupervised learning are of growing importance in a
number of fields. A cancer researcher might assay gene expression levels in
100 patients with breast cancer. He or she might then look for subgroups
among the breast cancer samples, or among the genes, in order to obtain
a better understanding of the disease. An online shopping site might try
to identify groups of shoppers with similar browsing and purchase histo-
ries, as well as items that are of particular interest to the shoppers within
each group. Then an individual shopper can be preferentially shown the
items in which he or she is particularly likely to be interested, based on
the purchase histories of similar shoppers. A search engine might choose
which search results to display to a particular individual based on the click
histories of other individuals with similar search patterns. These statistical
learning tasks, and many more, can be performed via unsupervised learning
techniques.
12.2
Principal Components Analysis
Principal components are discussed in Section 6.3.1 in the context of
principal components regression. When faced with a large set of corre-
lated variables, principal components allow us to summarize this set with
a smaller number of representative variables that collectively explain most
of the variability in the original set. The principal component directions
are presented in Section 6.3.1 as directions in feature space along which
the original data are highly variable. These directions also define lines and
subspaces that are as close as possible to the data cloud. To perform
principal components regression, we simply use principal components as
predictors in a regression model in place of the original larger set of vari-
ables.
Principal components analysis (PCA) refers to the process by which prin- principal
components
analysis
cipal components are computed, and the subsequent use of these compo-
nents in understanding the data. PCA is an unsupervised approach, since
it involves only a set of features X1, X2, . . . , Xp, and no associated response
Y . Apart from producing derived variables for use in supervised learning
problems, PCA also serves as a tool for data visualization (visualization of
