12.2 Principal Components Analysis
505
the observations or visualization of the variables). It can also be used as a
tool for data imputation — that is, for filling in missing values in a data
matrix.
We now discuss PCA in greater detail, focusing on the use of PCA as
a tool for unsupervised data exploration, in keeping with the topic of this
chapter.
12.2.1
What Are Principal Components?
Suppose that we wish to visualize n observations with measurements on a
set of p features, X1, X2, . . . , Xp, as part of an exploratory data analysis.
We could do this by examining two-dimensional scatterplots of the data,
each of which contains the n observations’ measurements on two of the
features. However, there are
'p
2
(
= p(p−1)/2 such scatterplots; for example,
with p = 10 there are 45 plots! If p is large, then it will certainly not be
possible to look at all of them; moreover, most likely none of them will
be informative since they each contain just a small fraction of the total
information present in the data set. Clearly, a better method is required to
visualize the n observations when p is large. In particular, we would like to
find a low-dimensional representation of the data that captures as much of
the information as possible. For instance, if we can obtain a two-dimensional
representation of the data that captures most of the information, then we
can plot the observations in this low-dimensional space.
PCA provides a tool to do just this. It finds a low-dimensional represen-
tation of a data set that contains as much as possible of the variation. The
idea is that each of the n observations lives in p-dimensional space, but not
all of these dimensions are equally interesting. PCA seeks a small number
of dimensions that are as interesting as possible, where the concept of in-
teresting is measured by the amount that the observations vary along each
dimension. Each of the dimensions found by PCA is a linear combination
of the p features. We now explain the manner in which these dimensions,
or principal components, are found.
The first principal component of a set of features X1, X2, . . . , Xp is the
normalized linear combination of the features
Z1 = φ11X1 + φ21X2 + · · · + φp1Xp
(12.1)
that has the largest variance. By normalized, we mean that )p
j=1 φ2
j1 = 1.
We refer to the elements φ11, . . . , φp1 as the loadings of the first principal loading
component; together, the loadings make up the principal component load-
ing vector, φ1 = (φ11 φ21 . . . φp1)T . We constrain the loadings so that
their sum of squares is equal to one, since otherwise setting these elements
to be arbitrarily large in absolute value could result in an arbitrarily large
variance.
Given an n × p data set X, how do we compute the first principal com-
ponent? Since we are only interested in variance, we assume that each of
the variables in X has been centered to have mean zero (that is, the col-
umn means of X are zero). We then look for the linear combination of the
sample feature values of the form
zi1 = φ11xi1 + φ21xi2 + · · · + φp1xip
(12.2)
