502
11. Survival Analysis and Censored Data
Applied
10. This exercise focuses on the brain tumor data, which is included in
the ISLP library.
(a) Plot the Kaplan-Meier survival curve with ±1 standard error
bands, using the KaplanMeierFitter() estimator in the lifelines
package.
(b) Draw a bootstrap sample of size n = 88 from the pairs (yi, δi),
and compute the resulting Kaplan-Meier survival curve. Repeat
this process B = 200 times. Use the results to obtain an estimate
of the standard error of the Kaplan-Meier survival curve at each
timepoint. Compare this to the standard errors obtained in (a).
(c) Fit a Cox proportional hazards model that uses all of the pre-
dictors to predict survival. Summarize the main findings.
(d) Stratify the data by the value of ki. (Since only one observation
has ki==40, you can group that observation together with the ob-
servations that have ki==60.) Plot Kaplan-Meier survival curves
for each of the five strata, adjusted for the other predictors.
11. This exercise makes use of the data in Table 11.4.
(a) Create two groups of observations. In Group 1, X < 2, whereas
in Group 2, X ≥2. Plot the Kaplan-Meier survival curves corre-
sponding to the two groups. Be sure to label the curves so that
it is clear which curve corresponds to which group. By eye, does
there appear to be a difference between the two groups’ survival
curves?
(b) Fit Cox’s proportional hazards model, using the group indicator
as a covariate. What is the estimated coefficient? Write a sen-
tence providing the interpretation of this coefficient, in terms
of the hazard or the instantaneous probability of the event. Is
there evidence that the true coefficient value is non-zero?
(c) Recall from Section 11.5.2 that in the case of a single binary
covariate, the log-rank test statistic should be identical to the
score statistic for the Cox model. Conduct a log-rank test to de-
termine whether there is a difference between the survival curves
for the two groups. How does the p-value for the log-rank test
statistic compare to the p-value for the score statistic for the
Cox model from (b)?
