12.4 Clustering Methods
529
Algorithm 12.3 Hierarchical Clustering
1. Begin with n observations and a measure (such as Euclidean dis-
tance) of all the
'n
2
(
= n(n −1)/2 pairwise dissimilarities. Treat each
observation as its own cluster.
2. For i = n, n −1, . . . , 2:
(a) Examine all pairwise inter-cluster dissimilarities among the i
clusters and identify the pair of clusters that are least dissimilar
(that is, most similar). Fuse these two clusters. The dissimilarity
between these two clusters indicates the height in the dendro-
gram at which the fusion should be placed.
(b) Compute the new pairwise inter-cluster dissimilarities among
the i −1 remaining clusters.
The Hierarchical Clustering Algorithm
The hierarchical clustering dendrogram is obtained via an extremely simple
algorithm. We begin by defining some sort of dissimilarity measure between
each pair of observations. Most often, Euclidean distance is used; we will
discuss the choice of dissimilarity measure later in this chapter. The algo-
rithm proceeds iteratively. Starting out at the bottom of the dendrogram,
each of the n observations is treated as its own cluster. The two clusters
that are most similar to each other are then fused so that there now are
n−1 clusters. Next the two clusters that are most similar to each other are
fused again, so that there now are n −2 clusters. The algorithm proceeds
in this fashion until all of the observations belong to one single cluster, and
the dendrogram is complete. Figure 12.13 depicts the first few steps of the
algorithm, for the data from Figure 12.12. To summarize, the hierarchical
clustering algorithm is given in Algorithm 12.3.
This algorithm seems simple enough, but one issue has not been ad-
dressed. Consider the bottom right panel in Figure 12.13. How did we
determine that the cluster {5, 7} should be fused with the cluster {8}?
We have a concept of the dissimilarity between pairs of observations, but
how do we define the dissimilarity between two clusters if one or both of
the clusters contains multiple observations? The concept of dissimilarity
between a pair of observations needs to be extended to a pair of groups
of observations. This extension is achieved by developing the notion of
linkage, which defines the dissimilarity between two groups of observa- linkage
tions. The four most common types of linkage—complete, average, single,
and centroid—are briefly described in Table 12.3. Average, complete, and
single linkage are most popular among statisticians. Average and complete
linkage are generally preferred over single linkage, as they tend to yield
more balanced dendrograms. Centroid linkage is often used in genomics,
but suffers from a major drawback in that an inversion can occur, whereby inversion
two clusters are fused at a height below either of the individual clusters in
the dendrogram. This can lead to difficulties in visualization as well as in in-
terpretation of the dendrogram. The dissimilarities computed in Step 2(b)
