13.1 A Quick Review of Hypothesis Testing
559
a comparable or more extreme value of the test statistic under the null
hypothesis. Finally, based on the p-value, we decide whether to reject the
null hypothesis. We now briefly discuss each of these steps in turn.
Step 1: Define the Null and Alternative Hypotheses
In hypothesis testing, we divide the world into two possibilities: the null
hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis. The null hypothesis, denoted H0, null
hypothesis
alternative
hypothesis
is the default state of belief about the world.4 For instance, null hypotheses
associated with the two questions posed earlier in this chapter are as follows:
1. The true coefficient βj in a linear regression of Y onto X1, . . . , Xp
equals zero.
2. There is no difference between the expected blood pressure of mice
in the control and treatment groups.
The null hypothesis is boring by construction: it may well be true, but we
might hope that our data will tell us otherwise.
The alternative hypothesis, denoted Ha, represents something different
and unexpected: for instance, that there is a difference between the ex-
pected blood pressure of the mice in the two groups. Typically, the alter-
native hypothesis simply posits that the null hypothesis does not hold: if
the null hypothesis states that there is no difference between A and B, then
the alternative hypothesis states that there is a difference between A and
B.
It is important to note that the treatment of H0 and Ha is asymmetric.
H0 is treated as the default state of the world, and we focus on using data
to reject H0. If we reject H0, then this provides evidence in favor of Ha. We
can think of rejecting H0 as making a discovery about our data: namely, we
are discovering that H0 does not hold! By contrast, if we fail to reject H0,
then our findings are more nebulous: we will not know whether we failed
to reject H0 because our sample size was too small (in which case testing
H0 again on a larger or higher-quality dataset might lead to rejection), or
whether we failed to reject H0 because H0 really holds.
Step 2: Construct the Test Statistic
Next, we wish to use our data in order to find evidence for or against
the null hypothesis. In order to do this, we must compute a test statistic, test statistic
denoted T, which summarizes the extent to which our data are consistent
with H0. The way in which we construct T depends on the nature of the
null hypothesis that we are testing.
To make things concrete, let xt
1, . . . , xt
nt denote the blood pressure mea-
surements for the nt mice in the treatment group, and let xc
1, . . . , xc
nc denote
the blood pressure measurements for the nc mice in the control group, and
µt = E(Xt), µc = E(Xc). To test H0 : µt = µc, we make use of a two-sample
t-statistic,5 defined as
two-sample
t-statistic
4H0 is pronounced “H naught” or “H zero”.
