578
13. Multiple Testing
13.5.1
A Re-Sampling Approach to the p-Value
We return to the example of Section 13.1.1, in which we wish to test whether
the mean of a random variable X equals the mean of a random variable Y ,
i.e. H0 : E(X) = E(Y ), against the alternative Ha : E(X)̸ = E(Y ). Given
nX independent observations from X and nY independent observations
from Y , the two-sample t-statistic takes the form
T =
ˆµX −ˆµY
s
G
1
nX +
1
nY
(13.11)
where ˆµX =
1
nX
)nX
i=1 xi, ˆµY =
1
nY
)nY
i=1 yi, s =
G
(nX−1)s2
X+(nY −1)s2
Y
nX+nY −2
,
and s2
X and s2
Y are unbiased estimators of the variances in the two groups.
A large (absolute) value of T provides evidence against H0.
If nX and nY are large, then T in (13.11) approximately follows a N(0, 1)
distribution. But if nX and nY are small, then in the absence of a strong
assumption about the distribution of X and Y , we do not know the the-
oretical null distribution of T.17 In this case, it turns out that we can
approximate the null distribution of T using a re-sampling approach, or re-sampling
more specifically, a permutation approach.
permutation
To do this, we conduct a thought experiment. If H0 holds, so that E(X) =
E(Y ), and we make the stronger assumption that the distributions of X
and Y are the same, then the distribution of T is invariant under swapping
observations of X with observations of Y . That is, if we randomly swap
some of the observations in X with the observations in Y , then the test
statistic T in (13.11) computed based on this swapped data has the same
distribution as T based on the original data. This is true only if H0 holds,
and the distributions of X and Y are the same.
This suggests that in order to approximate the null distribution of T,
we can take the following approach. We randomly permute the nX + nY
observations B times, for some large value of B, and each time we compute
(13.11). We let T ∗1, . . . , T ∗B denote the values of (13.11) on the permuted
data. These can be viewed as an approximation of the null distribution
of T under H0. Recall that by definition, a p-value is the probability of
observing a test statistic at least this extreme under H0. Therefore, to
compute a p-value for T, we can simply compute
p-value =
)B
b=1 1(|T ∗b|≥|T |)
B
,
(13.12)
the fraction of permuted datasets for which the value of the test statistic
is at least as extreme as the value observed on the original data. This
procedure is summarized in Algorithm 13.3.
17If we assume that X and Y are normally distributed, then T in (13.11) follows a
t-distribution with nX + nY −2 degrees of freedom under H0. However, in practice, the
distribution of random variables is rarely known, and so it can be preferable to perform
a re-sampling approach instead of making strong and unjustified assumptions. If the
results of the re-sampling approach disagree with the results of assuming a theoretical
null distribution, then the results of the re-sampling approach are more trustworthy.
