530
12. Unsupervised Learning
Linkage
Description
Complete
Maximal intercluster dissimilarity. Compute all pairwise
dissimilarities between the observations in cluster A and the
observations in cluster B, and record the largest of these dis-
similarities.
Single
Minimal intercluster dissimilarity. Compute all pairwise dis-
similarities between the observations in cluster A and the
observations in cluster B, and record the smallest of these
dissimilarities. Single linkage can result in extended, trailing
clusters in which single observations are fused one-at-a-time.
Average
Mean intercluster dissimilarity. Compute all pairwise dis-
similarities between the observations in cluster A and the
observations in cluster B, and record the average of these
dissimilarities.
Centroid
Dissimilarity between the centroid for cluster A (a mean
vector of length p) and the centroid for cluster B. Centroid
linkage can result in undesirable inversions.
TABLE 12.3. A summary of the four most commonly-used types of linkage in
hierarchical clustering.
of the hierarchical clustering algorithm will depend on the type of linkage
used, as well as on the choice of dissimilarity measure. Hence, the resulting
dendrogram typically depends quite strongly on the type of linkage used,
as is shown in Figure 12.14.
Choice of Dissimilarity Measure
Thus far, the examples in this chapter have used Euclidean distance as the
dissimilarity measure. But sometimes other dissimilarity measures might
be preferred. For example, correlation-based distance considers two obser-
vations to be similar if their features are highly correlated, even though the
observed values may be far apart in terms of Euclidean distance. This is
an unusual use of correlation, which is normally computed between vari-
ables; here it is computed between the observation profiles for each pair
of observations. Figure 12.15 illustrates the difference between Euclidean
and correlation-based distance. Correlation-based distance focuses on the
shapes of observation profiles rather than their magnitudes.
The choice of dissimilarity measure is very important, as it has a strong
effect on the resulting dendrogram. In general, careful attention should be
paid to the type of data being clustered and the scientific question at hand.
These considerations should determine what type of dissimilarity measure
is used for hierarchical clustering.
For instance, consider an online retailer interested in clustering shoppers
based on their past shopping histories. The goal is to identify subgroups
of similar shoppers, so that shoppers within each subgroup can be shown
items and advertisements that are particularly likely to interest them. Sup-
pose the data takes the form of a matrix where the rows are the shoppers
and the columns are the items available for purchase; the elements of the
data matrix indicate the number of times a given shopper has purchased a
