556
12. Unsupervised Learning
11. Write a Python function to perform matrix completion as in Algo-
rithm 12.1, and as outlined in Section 12.5.2. In each iteration, the
function should keep track of the relative error, as well as the itera-
tion count. Iterations should continue until the relative error is small
enough or until some maximum number of iterations is reached (set a
default value for this maximum number). Furthermore, there should
be an option to print out the progress in each iteration.
Test your function on the Boston data. First, standardize the features
to
have
mean
zero
and
standard
deviation
one
using
the
StandardScaler() function. Run an experiment where you randomly
leave out an increasing (and nested) number of observations from 5%
to 30%, in steps of 5%. Apply Algorithm 12.1 with M = 1, 2, . . . , 8.
Display the approximation error as a function of the fraction of ob-
servations that are missing, and the value of M, averaged over 10
repetitions of the experiment.
12. In Section 12.5.2, Algorithm 12.1 was implemented using the
svd() function from the np.linalg module. However, given the con-
nection between the svd() function and the PCA() estimator high-
lighted in the lab, we could have instead implemented the algorithm
using PCA().
Write a function to implement Algorithm 12.1 that makes use of PCA()
rather than svd().
13. On the book website, www.statlearning.com, there is a gene expres-
sion data set (Ch12Ex13.csv) that consists of 40 tissue samples with
measurements on 1,000 genes. The first 20 samples are from healthy
patients, while the second 20 are from a diseased group.
(a) Load in the data using pd.read_csv(). You will need to select
header = None.
(b) Apply hierarchical clustering to the samples using correlation-
based distance, and plot the dendrogram. Do the genes separate
the samples into the two groups? Do your results depend on the
type of linkage used?
(c) Your collaborator wants to know which genes differ the most
across the two groups. Suggest a way to answer this question,
and apply it here.
