574
13. Multiple Testing
Therefore, we instead control the false discovery rate (FDR)15, defined false
discovery
rate
as
FDR = E(FDP) = E(V/R).
(13.9)
When we control the FDR at (say) level q = 20%, we are rejecting as many
null hypotheses as possible while guaranteeing that no more than 20% of
those rejected null hypotheses are false positives, on average.
In the definition of the FDR in (13.9), the expectation is taken over the
population from which the data are generated. For instance, suppose we
control the FDR for m null hypotheses at q = 0.2. This means that if we
repeat this experiment a huge number of times, and each time control the
FDR at q = 0.2, then we should expect that, on average, 20% of the rejected
null hypotheses will be false positives. On a given dataset, the fraction of
false positives among the rejected hypotheses may be greater than or less
than 20%.
Thus far, we have motivated the use of the FDR from a pragmatic per-
spective, by arguing that when m is large, controlling the FWER is simply
too stringent, and will not lead to “enough” discoveries. An additional mo-
tivation for the use of the FDR is that it aligns well with the way that data
are often collected in contemporary applications. As datasets continue to
grow in size across a variety of fields, it is increasingly common to conduct a
huge number of hypothesis tests for exploratory, rather than confirmatory,
purposes. For instance, a genomic researcher might sequence the genomes
of individuals with and without some particular medical condition, and
then, for each of 20,000 genes, test whether sequence variants in that gene
are associated with the medical condition of interest. This amounts to per-
forming m = 20,000 hypothesis tests. The analysis is exploratory in nature,
in the sense that the researcher does not have any particular hypothesis
in mind; instead she wishes to see whether there is modest evidence for
the association between each gene and the disease, with a plan to further
investigate any genes for which there is such evidence. She is likely willing
to tolerate some number of false positives in the set of genes that she will
investigate further; thus, the FWER is not an appropriate choice. How-
ever, some correction for multiple testing is required: it would not be a
good idea for her to simply investigate all genes with p-values less than
(say) 0.05, since we would expect 1,000 genes to have such small p-values
simply by chance, even if no genes are associated with the disease (since
0.05 × 20,000 = 1,000). Controlling the FDR for her exploratory analysis
at 20% guarantees that — on average — no more than 20% of the genes
that she investigates further are false positives.
It is worth noting that unlike p-values, for which a threshold of 0.05
is typically viewed as the minimum standard of evidence for a “positive”
result, and a threshold of 0.01 or even 0.001 is viewed as much more com-
pelling, there is no standard accepted threshold for FDR control. Instead,
the choice of FDR threshold is typically context-dependent, or even dataset-
dependent. For instance, the genomic researcher in the previous example
might seek to control the FDR at a threshold of 10% if the planned follow-
15If R = 0, then we replace the ratio V/R with 0, to avoid computing 0/0. Formally,
FDR = E(V/R|R > 0) Pr(R > 0).
