564
13. Multiple Testing
acumen. She tells 1,024 (1,024 = 210) potential new clients that she can
correctly predict whether Apple’s stock price will increase or decrease for 10
days running. There are 210 possibilities for how Apple’s stock price might
change over the course of these 10 days. Therefore, she emails each client
one of these 210 possibilities. The vast majority of her potential clients
will find that the stockbroker’s predictions are no better than chance (and
many will find them to be even worse than chance). But a broken clock is
right twice a day, and one of her potential clients will be really impressed
to find that her predictions were correct for all 10 of the days! And so the
stockbroker gains a new client.
What happened here? Does the stockbroker have any actual insight into
whether Apple’s stock price will increase or decrease? No. How, then, did
she manage to predict Apple’s stock price perfectly for 10 days running?
The answer is that she made a lot of guesses, and one of them happened
to be exactly right.
How does this relate to multiple testing? Suppose that we flip 1,024 fair
coins11 ten times each. Then we would expect (on average) one coin to
come up all tails. (There’s a 1/210 = 1/1,024 chance that any single coin
will come up all tails. So if we flip 1,024 coins, then we expect one coin to
come up all tails, on average.) If one of our coins comes up all tails, then
we might therefore conclude that this particular coin is not fair. In fact, a
standard hypothesis test for the null hypothesis that this particular coin
is fair would lead to a p-value below 0.002!12 But it would be incorrect to
conclude that the coin is not fair: in fact, the null hypothesis holds, and we
just happen to have gotten ten tails in a row by chance.
These examples illustrate the main challenge of multiple testing: when multiple
testing
testing a huge number of null hypotheses, we are bound to get some very
small p-values by chance. If we make a decision about whether to reject each
null hypothesis without accounting for the fact that we have performed a
very large number of tests, then we may end up rejecting a great number
of true null hypotheses — that is, making a large number of Type I errors.
How severe is the problem? Recall from the previous section that if we
reject a single null hypothesis, H0, if its p-value is less than, say, α = 0.01,
then there is a 1% chance of making a false rejection if H0 is in fact true.
Now what if we test m null hypotheses, H01, . . . , H0m, all of which are true?
There’s a 1% chance of rejecting any individual null hypothesis; therefore,
we expect to falsely reject approximately 0.01 × m null hypotheses. If m =
10,000, then that means that we expect to falsely reject 100 null hypotheses
by chance! That is a lot of Type I errors.
The crux of the issue is as follows: rejecting a null hypothesis if the p-value
is below α controls the probability of falsely rejecting that null hypothesis
at level α. However, if we do this for m null hypotheses, then the chance of
falsely rejecting at least one of the m null hypotheses is quite a bit higher!
11A fair coin is one that has an equal chance of landing heads or tails.
12Recall that the p-value is the probability of observing data at least this extreme,
under the null hypothesis. If the coin is fair, then the probability of observing at least
ten tails is (1/2)10 = 1/1,024 < 0.001. The p-value is therefore 2/1,024 < 0.002, since
this is the probability of observing ten heads or ten tails.
