12.3 Missing Values and Matrix Completion
515
proach, and is reflective of the fact that PCA is generally used as a tool for
exploratory data analysis.
On the other hand, if we compute principal components for use in a
supervised analysis, such as the principal components regression presented
in Section 6.3.1, then there is a simple and objective way to determine how
many principal components to use: we can treat the number of principal
component score vectors to be used in the regression as a tuning parameter
to be selected via cross-validation or a related approach. The comparative
simplicity of selecting the number of principal components for a supervised
analysis is one manifestation of the fact that supervised analyses tend to
be more clearly defined and more objectively evaluated than unsupervised
analyses.
12.2.5
Other Uses for Principal Components
We saw in Section 6.3.1 that we can perform regression using the principal
component score vectors as features. In fact, many statistical techniques,
such as regression, classification, and clustering, can be easily adapted to
use the n × M matrix whose columns are the first M ≪p principal com-
ponent score vectors, rather than using the full n × p data matrix. This
can lead to less noisy results, since it is often the case that the signal (as
opposed to the noise) in a data set is concentrated in its first few principal
components.
12.3
Missing Values and Matrix Completion
Often datasets have missing values, which can be a nuisance. For example,
suppose that we wish to analyze the USArrests data, and discover that 20
of the 200 values have been randomly corrupted and marked as missing.
Unfortunately, the statistical learning methods that we have seen in this
book cannot handle missing values. How should we proceed?
We could remove the rows that contain missing observations and per-
form our data analysis on the complete rows. But this seems wasteful, and
depending on the fraction missing, unrealistic. Alternatively, if xij is miss-
ing, then we could replace it by the mean of the jth column (using the
non-missing entries to compute the mean). Although this is a common and
convenient strategy, often we can do better by exploiting the correlation
between the variables.
In this section we show how principal components can be used to impute impute
imputation
the missing values, through a process known as matrix completion. The
matrix
completion
completed matrix can then be used in a statistical learning method, such
as linear regression or LDA.
This approach for imputing missing data is appropriate if the missingness
is random. For example, it is suitable if a patient’s weight is missing because missing at
random
the battery of the electronic scale was flat at the time of his exam. By
contrast, if the weight is missing because the patient was too heavy to
climb on the scale, then this is not missing at random; the missingness is
