12.5 Lab: Unsupervised Learning
535
In addition, clustering methods generally are not very robust to pertur-
bations to the data. For instance, suppose that we cluster n observations,
and then cluster the observations again after removing a subset of the n
observations at random. One would hope that the two sets of clusters ob-
tained would be quite similar, but often this is not the case!
A Tempered Approach to Interpreting the Results of Clustering
We have described some of the issues associated with clustering. However,
clustering can be a very useful and valid statistical tool if used properly. We
mentioned that small decisions in how clustering is performed, such as how
the data are standardized and what type of linkage is used, can have a large
effect on the results. Therefore, we recommend performing clustering with
different choices of these parameters, and looking at the full set of results
in order to see what patterns consistently emerge. Since clustering can be
non-robust, we recommend clustering subsets of the data in order to get a
sense of the robustness of the clusters obtained. Most importantly, we must
be careful about how the results of a clustering analysis are reported. These
results should not be taken as the absolute truth about a data set. Rather,
they should constitute a starting point for the development of a scientific
hypothesis and further study, preferably on an independent data set.
12.5
Lab: Unsupervised Learning
In this lab we demonstrate PCA and clustering on several datasets. As in
other labs, we import some of our libraries at this top level. This makes
the code more readable, as scanning the first few lines of the notebook tell
us what libraries are used in this notebook.
In [1]: import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from statsmodels.datasets import get_rdataset
from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from ISLP import load_data
We also collect the new imports needed for this lab.
In [2]: from sklearn.cluster import \
(KMeans,
AgglomerativeClustering)
from scipy.cluster.hierarchy import \
(dendrogram ,
cut_tree)
from ISLP.cluster import compute_linkage
12.5.1
Principal Components Analysis
In this lab, we perform PCA on USArrests, a data set in the R computing
environment. We retrieve the data using get_rdataset(), which can fetch get_
rdataset()
