13.5 A Re-Sampling Approach to p-Values and False Discovery Rates
577
the m = 2,000 fund managers appear to have beaten the market without
performing correction for multiple testing — for instance, 13 of them have
p-values below 0.001. By contrast, when the FDR is controlled at level 0.3,
we can conclude that 279 fund managers are beating the market: we expect
that no more than around 279×0.3 = 83.7 of these fund managers had good
performance only due to chance. Thus, we see that FDR control is much
milder — and more powerful — than FWER control, in the sense that it
allows us to reject many more null hypotheses, with a cost of substantially
more false positives.
The Benjamini–Hochberg procedure has been around since the mid-
1990s. While a great many papers have been published since then proposing
alternative approaches for FDR control that can perform better in partic-
ular scenarios, the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure remains a very useful
and widely-applicable approach.
13.5
A Re-Sampling Approach to p-Values and
False Discovery Rates
Thus far, the discussion in this chapter has assumed that we are interested
in testing a particular null hypothesis H0 using a test statistic T, which
has some known (or assumed) distribution under H0, such as a normal
distribution, a t-distribution, a χ2-distribution, or an F-distribution. This
is referred to as the theoretical null distribution. We typically rely upon theoretical
null
distribution
the availability of a theoretical null distribution in order to obtain a p-
value associated with our test statistic. Indeed, for most of the types of
null hypotheses that we might be interested in testing, a theoretical null
distribution is available, provided that we are willing to make stringent
assumptions about our data.
However, if our null hypothesis H0 or test statistic T is somewhat un-
usual, then it may be the case that no theoretical null distribution is avail-
able. Alternatively, even if a theoretical null distribution exists, then we
may be wary of relying upon it, perhaps because some assumption that is
required for it to hold is violated. For instance, maybe the sample size is
too small.
In this section, we present a framework for performing inference in this
setting, which exploits the availability of fast computers in order to approx-
imate the null distribution of T, and thereby to obtain a p-value. While this
framework is very general, it must be carefully instantiated for a specific
problem of interest. Therefore, in what follows, we consider a specific ex-
ample in which we wish to test whether the means of two random variables
are equal, using a two-sample t-test.
The discussion in this section is more challenging than the preceding
sections in this chapter, and can be safely skipped by a reader who is
content to use the theoretical null distribution to compute p-values for his
or her test statistics.
