12.6 Exercises
555
(c) Hierarchically cluster the states using complete linkage and Eu-
clidean distance, after scaling the variables to have standard de-
viation one.
(d) What effect does scaling the variables have on the hierarchical
clustering obtained? In your opinion, should the variables be
scaled before the inter-observation dissimilarities are computed?
Provide a justification for your answer.
10. In this problem, you will generate simulated data, and then perform
PCA and K-means clustering on the data.
(a) Generate a simulated data set with 20 observations in each of
three classes (i.e. 60 observations total), and 50 variables.
Hint: There are a number of functions in Python that you can
use to generate data. One example is the normal() method of
the random() function in numpy; the uniform() method is another
option. Be sure to add a mean shift to the observations in each
class so that there are three distinct classes.
(b) Perform PCA on the 60 observations and plot the first two prin-
cipal component score vectors. Use a different color to indicate
the observations in each of the three classes. If the three classes
appear separated in this plot, then continue on to part (c). If
not, then return to part (a) and modify the simulation so that
there is greater separation between the three classes. Do not
continue to part (c) until the three classes show at least some
separation in the first two principal component score vectors.
(c) Perform K-means clustering of the observations with K = 3.
How well do the clusters that you obtained in K-means cluster-
ing compare to the true class labels?
Hint: You can use the pd.crosstab() function in Python to com-
pare the true class labels to the class labels obtained by cluster-
ing. Be careful how you interpret the results: K-means clustering
will arbitrarily number the clusters, so you cannot simply check
whether the true class labels and clustering labels are the same.
(d) Perform K-means clustering with K = 2. Describe your results.
(e) Now perform K-means clustering with K = 4, and describe your
results.
(f) Now perform K-means clustering with K = 3 on the first two
principal component score vectors, rather than on the raw data.
That is, perform K-means clustering on the 60 × 2 matrix of
which the first column is the first principal component score
vector, and the second column is the second principal component
score vector. Comment on the results.
(g) Using the StandardScaler() estimator, perform K-means clus-
tering with K = 3 on the data after scaling each variable to have
standard deviation one. How do these results compare to those
obtained in (b)? Explain.
