526
12. Unsupervised Learning
−6
−4
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
4
X1
X2
FIGURE 12.10.
Forty-five observations generated in two-dimensional space.
In reality there are three distinct classes, shown in separate colors. However, we
will treat these class labels as unknown and will seek to cluster the observations
in order to discover the classes from the data.
and then discuss how hierarchical clustering is actually performed—that is,
how the dendrogram is built.
Interpreting a Dendrogram
We begin with the simulated data set shown in Figure 12.10, consisting of
45 observations in two-dimensional space. The data were generated from a
three-class model; the true class labels for each observation are shown in
distinct colors. However, suppose that the data were observed without the
class labels, and that we wanted to perform hierarchical clustering of the
data. Hierarchical clustering (with complete linkage, to be discussed later)
yields the result shown in the left-hand panel of Figure 12.11. How can we
interpret this dendrogram?
In the left-hand panel of Figure 12.11, each leaf of the dendrogram rep-
resents one of the 45 observations in Figure 12.10. However, as we move
up the tree, some leaves begin to fuse into branches. These correspond to
observations that are similar to each other. As we move higher up the tree,
branches themselves fuse, either with leaves or other branches. The earlier
(lower in the tree) fusions occur, the more similar the groups of observa-
tions are to each other. On the other hand, observations that fuse later
(near the top of the tree) can be quite different. In fact, this statement
can be made precise: for any two observations, we can look for the point in
the tree where branches containing those two observations are first fused.
The height of this fusion, as measured on the vertical axis, indicates how
different the two observations are. Thus, observations that fuse at the very
bottom of the tree are quite similar to each other, whereas observations
that fuse close to the top of the tree will tend to be quite different.
This highlights a very important point in interpreting dendrograms that
is often misunderstood. Consider the left-hand panel of Figure 12.12, which
shows a simple dendrogram obtained from hierarchically clustering nine
