13.1 A Quick Review of Hypothesis Testing
561
To make this concrete, suppose that T = 2.33 for the test statistic in
(13.1). Then, we can ask: what is the probability of having observed such
a large value of T, if indeed H0 holds? It turns out that under H0, the
distribution of T in (13.1) follows approximately a N(0, 1) distribution7 —
that is, a normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 1. This distribution
is displayed in Figure 13.1. We see that the vast majority — 98% — of the
N(0, 1) distribution falls between −2.33 and 2.33. This means that under
H0, we would expect to see such a large value of |T| only 2% of the time.
Therefore, the p-value corresponding to T = 2.33 is 0.02.
The distribution of the test statistic under H0 (also known as the test
statistic’s null distribution) will depend on the details of what type of null
distribution
null hypothesis is being tested, and what type of test statistic is used. In
general, most commonly-used test statistics follow a well-known statistical
distribution under the null hypothesis — such as a normal distribution,
a t-distribution, a χ2-distribution, or an F-distribution — provided that
the sample size is sufficiently large and that some other assumptions hold.
Typically, the R function that is used to compute a test statistic will make
use of this null distribution in order to output a p-value. In Section 13.5,
we will see an approach to estimate the null distribution of a test statistic
using re-sampling; in many contemporary settings, this is a very attractive
option, as it exploits the availability of fast computers in order to avoid
having to make potentially problematic assumptions about the data.
The p-value is perhaps one of the most used and abused notions in all of
statistics. In particular, it is sometimes said that the p-value is the probabil-
ity that H0 holds, i.e., that the null hypothesis is true. This is not correct!
The one and only correct interpretation of the p-value is as the fraction
of the time that we would expect to see such an extreme value of the test
statistic8 if we repeated the experiment many many times, provided H0
holds.
In Step 2 we computed a test statistic, and noted that a large (absolute)
value of the test statistic provides evidence against H0. In Step 3 the test
statistic was converted to a p-value, with small p-values providing evidence
against H0. What, then, did we accomplish by converting the test statistic
from Step 2 into a p-value in Step 3? To answer this question, suppose
a data analyst conducts a statistical test, and reports a test statistic of
T = 17.3. Does this provide strong evidence against H0? It’s impossible
to know, without more information: in particular, we would need to know
7More precisely, assuming that the observations are drawn from a normal distribution,
then T follows a t-distribution with nt + nc −2 degrees of freedom. Provided that nt +
nc −2 is larger than around 40, this is very well-approximated by a N(0, 1) distribution.
In Section 13.5, we will see an alternative and often more attractive way to approximate
the null distribution of T, which avoids making stringent assumptions about the data.
8A one-sided p-value is the probability of seeing such an extreme value of the test
statistic; e.g. the probability of seeing a test statistic greater than or equal to T = 2.33.
A two-sided p-value is the probability of seeing such an extreme value of the absolute
test statistic; e.g. the probability of seeing a test statistic greater than or equal to 2.33
or less than or equal to −2.33. The default recommendation is to report a two-sided
p-value rather than a one-sided p-value, unless there is a clear and compelling reason
that only one direction of the test statistic is of scientific interest.
