11.9 Exercises
499
(f) A researcher wishes to model the number of years of education
of the residents of a small town. Residents who enroll in college
out of town are more likely to be lost to follow up, and are
also more likely to attend graduate school, relative to those who
attend college in town.
(g) Researchers conduct a study of disease-free survival (i.e. time
until disease relapse following treatment). Patients who have
not relapsed within five years are considered to be cured, and
thus their survival time is censored at five years.
(h) We wish to model the failure time for some electrical component.
This component can be manufactured in Iowa or in Pittsburgh,
with no difference in quality. The Iowa factory opened five years
ago, and so components manufactured in Iowa are censored at
five years. The Pittsburgh factory opened two years ago, so those
components are censored at two years.
(i) We wish to model the failure time of an electrical component
made in two different factories, one of which opened before the
other. We have reason to believe that the components manufac-
tured in the factory that opened earlier are of higher quality.
2. We conduct a study with n = 4 participants who have just purchased
cell phones, in order to model the time until phone replacement. The
first participant replaces her phone after 1.2 years. The second par-
ticipant still has not replaced her phone at the end of the two-year
study period. The third participant changes her phone number and is
lost to follow up (but has not yet replaced her phone) 1.5 years into
the study. The fourth participant replaces her phone after 0.2 years.
For each of the four participants (i = 1, . . . , 4), answer the following
questions using the notation introduced in Section 11.1:
(a) Is the participant’s cell phone replacement time censored?
(b) Is the value of ci known, and if so, then what is it?
(c) Is the value of ti known, and if so, then what is it?
(d) Is the value of yi known, and if so, then what is it?
(e) Is the value of δi known, and if so, then what is it?
3. For the example in Exercise 2, report the values of K, d1, . . . , dK,
r1, . . . , rK, and q1, . . . , qK, where this notation was defined in Sec-
tion 11.3.
4. This problem makes use of the Kaplan-Meier survival curve displayed
in Figure 11.9. The raw data that went into plotting this survival
curve is given in Table 11.4. The covariate column of that table is
not needed for this problem.
(a) What is the estimated probability of survival past 50 days?
