562
13. Multiple Testing
Truth
H0
Ha
Decision
Reject H0
Type I Error
Correct
Do Not Reject H0
Correct
Type II Error
TABLE 13.1. A summary of the possible scenarios associated with testing the
null hypothesis H0. Type I errors are also known as false positives, and Type II
errors as false negatives.
what value of the test statistic should be expected, under H0. This is exactly
what a p-value gives us. In other words, a p-value allows us to transform
our test statistic, which is measured on some arbitrary and uninterpretable
scale, into a number between 0 and 1 that can be more easily interpreted.
Step 4: Decide Whether to Reject the Null Hypothesis
Once we have computed a p-value corresponding to H0, it remains for
us to decide whether or not to reject H0. (We do not usually talk about
“accepting” H0: instead, we talk about “failing to reject” H0.) A small p-
value indicates that such a large value of the test statistic is unlikely to
occur under H0, and thereby provides evidence against H0. If the p-value
is sufficiently small, then we will want to reject H0 (and, therefore, make
a “discovery”). But how small is small enough to reject H0?
It turns out that the answer to this question is very much in the eyes
of the beholder, or more specifically, the data analyst. The smaller the p-
value, the stronger the evidence against H0. In some fields, it is typical to
reject H0 if the p-value is below 0.05; this means that, if H0 holds, we would
expect to see such a small p-value no more than 5% of the time.9 However,
in other fields, a much higher burden of proof is required: for example, in
some areas of physics, it is typical to reject H0 only if the p-value is below
10−9!
In the example displayed in Figure 13.1, if we use a threshold of 0.05 as
our cut-off for rejecting the null hypothesis, then we will reject the null. By
contrast, if we use a threshold of 0.01, then we will fail to reject the null.
These ideas are formalized in the next section.
13.1.2
Type I and Type II Errors
If the null hypothesis holds, then we say that it is a true null hypothesis; true null
hypothesis
otherwise, it is a false null hypothesis. For instance, if we test H0 : µt = µc
false null
hypothesis
as in Section 13.1.1, and there is indeed no difference in the population
mean blood pressure for mice in the treatment group and mice in the
control group, then H0 is true; otherwise, it is false. Of course, we do not
know a priori whether H0 is true or whether it is false: this is why we need
to conduct a hypothesis test!
9Though a threshold of 0.05 to reject H0 is ubiquitous in some areas of science, we
advise against blind adherence to this arbitrary choice. Furthermore, a data analyst
should typically report the p-value itself, rather than just whether or not it exceeds a
specified threshold value.
