516
12. Unsupervised Learning
informative, and the approach described here for handling missing data is
not suitable.
Sometimes data is missing by necessity. For example, if we form a matrix
of the ratings (on a scale from 1 to 5) that n customers have given to the
entire Netflix catalog of p movies, then most of the matrix will be missing,
since no customer will have seen and rated more than a tiny fraction of the
catalog. If we can impute the missing values well, then we will have an idea
of what each customer will think of movies they have not yet seen. Hence
matrix completion can be used to power recommender systems.
recommender
systems
Principal Components with Missing Values
In Section 12.2.2, we showed that the first M principal component score
and loading vectors provide the “best” approximation to the data matrix
X, in the sense of (12.6). Suppose that some of the observations xij are
missing. We now show how one can both impute the missing values and
solve the principal component problem at the same time. We return to a
modified form of the optimization problem (12.6),
minimize
A∈Rn×M,B∈Rp×M



0
(i,j)∈O
>
xij −
M
0
m=1
aimbjm
?2

,
(12.12)
where O is the set of all observed pairs of indices (i, j), a subset of the
possible n × p pairs.
Once we solve this problem:
• we can estimate a missing observation xij using ˆxij = )M
m=1 ˆaimˆbjm,
where ˆaim and ˆbjm are the (i, m) and (j, m) elements, respectively,
of the matrices ˆA and ˆB that solve (12.12); and
• we can (approximately) recover the M principal component scores
and loadings, as we did when the data were complete.
It turns out that solving (12.12) exactly is difficult, unlike in the case of
complete data: the eigen decomposition no longer applies. But the sim-
ple iterative approach in Algorithm 12.1, which is demonstrated in Sec-
tion 12.5.2, typically provides a good solution.56
We illustrate Algorithm 12.1 on the USArrests data. There are p = 4
variables and n = 50 observations (states). We first standardized the data
so each variable has mean zero and standard deviation one. We then ran-
domly selected 20 of the 50 states, and then for each of these we randomly
set one of the four variables to be missing. Thus, 10% of the elements of the
data matrix were missing. We applied Algorithm 12.1 with M = 1 principal
component. Figure 12.5 shows that the recovery of the missing elements
5This algorithm is referred to as “Hard-Impute” in Mazumder, Hastie, and Tibshi-
rani (2010) “Spectral regularization algorithms for learning large incomplete matrices”,
published in Journal of Machine Learning Research, pages 2287–2322.
6Each iteration of Step 2 of this algorithm decreases the objective (12.14). However,
the algorithm is not guaranteed to achieve the global optimum of (12.12).
