558
13. Multiple Testing
challenges are presented in Section 13.3, and more contemporary solutions
in Sections 13.4 and 13.5.
In particular, Section 13.4 focuses on the false discovery rate. The no-
tion of the false discovery rate dates back to the 1990s. It quickly rose in
popularity in the early 2000s, when large-scale data sets began to come out
of genomics. These datasets were unique not only because of their large
size,1 but also because they were typically collected for exploratory pur-
poses: researchers collected these datasets in order to test a huge number
of null hypotheses, rather than just a very small number of pre-specified
null hypotheses. Today, of course, huge datasets are collected without a
pre-specified null hypothesis across virtually all fields. As we will see, the
false discovery rate is perfectly-suited for this modern-day reality.
This chapter naturally centers upon the classical statistical technique of
p-values, used to quantify the results of hypothesis tests. At the time of
writing of this book (2020), p-values have recently been the topic of exten-
sive commentary in the social science research community, to the extent
that some social science journals have gone so far as to ban the use of
p-values altogether! We will simply comment that when properly under-
stood and applied, p-values provide a powerful tool for drawing inferential
conclusions from our data.
13.1
A Quick Review of Hypothesis Testing
Hypothesis tests provide a rigorous statistical framework for answering
simple “yes-or-no” questions about data, such as the following:
1. Is the true coefficient βj in a linear regression of Y onto X1, . . . , Xp
equal to zero?2
2. Is there a difference in the expected blood pressure of laboratory mice
in the control group and laboratory mice in the treatment group?3
In Section 13.1.1, we briefly review the steps involved in hypothesis test-
ing. Section 13.1.2 discusses the different types of mistakes, or errors, that
can occur in hypothesis testing.
13.1.1
Testing a Hypothesis
Conducting a hypothesis test typically proceeds in four steps. First, we de-
fine the null and alternative hypotheses. Next, we construct a test statistic
that summarizes the strength of evidence against the null hypothesis. We
then compute a p-value that quantifies the probability of having obtained
1Microarray data was viewed as “big data” at the time, although by today’s standards,
this label seems quaint: a microarray dataset can be (and typically was) stored in a
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet!
2This hypothesis test was discussed on page 76 of Chapter 3.
3The “treatment group” refers to the set of mice that receive an experimental treat-
ment, and the “control group” refers to those that do not.
