13.7 Exercises
595
reject exactly one null hypothesis when controlling the FWER
at level 0.1.
(b) Now give an example of five p-values for which Bonferroni re-
jects one null hypothesis and Holm rejects more than one null
hypothesis at level 0.1.
6. For each of the three panels in Figure 13.3, answer the following
questions:
(a) How many false positives, false negatives, true positives, true
negatives, Type I errors, and Type II errors result from applying
the Bonferroni procedure to control the FWER at level α =
0.05?
(b) How many false positives, false negatives, true positives, true
negatives, Type I errors, and Type II errors result from applying
the Holm procedure to control the FWER at level α = 0.05?
(c) What is the false discovery proportion associated with using the
Bonferroni procedure to control the FWER at level α = 0.05?
(d) What is the false discovery proportion associated with using the
Holm procedure to control the FWER at level α = 0.05?
(e) How would the answers to (a) and (c) change if we instead used
the Bonferroni procedure to control the FWER at level α =
0.001?
Applied
7. This problem makes use of the Carseats dataset in the ISLP package.
(a) For each quantitative variable in the dataset besides Sales, fit
a linear model to predict Sales using that quantitative variable.
Report the p-values associated with the coefficients for the vari-
ables. That is, for each model of the form Y = β0 + β1X + ϵ,
report the p-value associated with the coefficient β1. Here, Y
represents Sales and X represents one of the other quantitative
variables.
(b) Suppose we control the Type I error at level α = 0.05 for the
p-values obtained in (a). Which null hypotheses do we reject?
(c) Now suppose we control the FWER at level 0.05 for the p-values.
Which null hypotheses do we reject?
(d) Finally, suppose we control the FDR at level 0.2 for the p-values.
Which null hypotheses do we reject?
8. In this problem, we will simulate data from m = 100 fund managers.
rng = np.random.default_rng(1)
n, m = 20, 100
X = rng.normal(size=(n, m))
