1.4
Guidelines for Designing Experiments
To use the statistical approach in designing and analyzing an experiment, it is necessary for
everyone involved in the experiment to have a clear idea in advance of exactly what is to be stud-
ied, how the data are to be collected, and at least a qualitative understanding of how these data
are to be analyzed. An outline of the recommended procedure is shown in Table 1.1. We now
give a brief discussion of this outline and elaborate on some of the key points. For more details,
see Coleman and Montgomery (1993), and the references therein. The supplemental text
material for this chapter is also useful.
1. Recognition of and statement of the problem.
This may seem to be a rather obvi-
ous point, but in practice often neither it is simple to realize that a problem requiring
experimentation exists, nor is it simple to develop a clear and generally accepted state-
ment of this problem. It is necessary to develop all ideas about the objectives of the
experiment. Usually, it is important to solicit input from all concerned parties: engi-
neering, quality assurance, manufacturing, marketing, management, customer, and
operating personnel (who usually have much insight and who are too often ignored).
For this reason, a team approach to designing experiments is recommended.
It is usually helpful to prepare a list of specic problems or questions that are
to be addressed by the experiment. A clear statement of the problem often contributes
substantially to better understanding of the phenomenon being studied and the nal
solution of the problem. 
It is also important to keep the overall objectives of the experiment in mind.
There are several broad reasons for running experiments and each type of experiment
will generate its own list of specic questions that need to be addressed. Some (but
by no means all) of the reasons for running experiments include:
a. Factor screening or characterization. When a system or process is new,
it is usually important to learn which factors have the most inuence on
the response(s) of interest. Often there are a lot of factors. This usually
indicates that the experimenters do not know much about the system so
screening is essential if we are to efciently get the desired performance
from the system. Screening experiments are extremely important when
working with new systems or technologies so that valuable resources will
not be wasted using best guess and OFAT approaches.
b. Optimization. After the system has been characterized and we are rea-
sonably certain that the important factors have been identified, the next
objective is usually optimization, that is, find the settings or levels of
14
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
■TA B L E 1 . 1
Guidelines for Designing an Experiment
1. Recognition of and statement of the problem
Pre-experimental
2. Selection of the response variablea
planning
3. Choice of factors, levels, and rangesa
4. Choice of experimental design
5. Performing the experiment
6. Statistical analysis of the data
7. Conclusions and recommendations
aIn practice, steps 2 and 3 are often done simultaneously or in reverse order.
