1.3 Basic Principles
11
E X A M P L E 1 . 5
Formulating a Product
A biochemist is formulating a diagnostic product to detect
the presence of a certain disease. The product is a mixture
of biological materials, chemical reagents, and other mate-
rials that when combined with human blood react to pro-
vide a diagnostic indication. The type of experiment used
here is a mixture experiment, because various ingredients
that are combined to form the diagnostic make up 100 per-
cent of the mixture composition (on a volume, weight, or
mole ratio basis), and the response is a function of the mix-
ture proportions that are present in the product. Mixture
experiments are a special type of response surface experi-
ment that we will study in Chapter 11. They are very useful
in designing biotechnology products, pharmaceuticals,
foods and beverages, paints and coatings, consumer prod-
ucts such as detergents, soaps, and other personal care
products, and a wide variety of other products.
E X A M P L E 1 . 6
Designing a Web Page
A lot of business today is conducted via the World Wide
Web. Consequently, the design of a business’ web page has
potentially important economic impact. Suppose that the
Web site has the following components: (1) a photoash
image, (2) a main headline, (3) a subheadline, (4) a main
text copy, (5) a main image on the right side, (6) a back-
ground design, and (7) a footer. We are interested in nding
the factors that inuence the click-through rate; that is, the
number of visitors who click through into the site divided by
the total number of visitors to the site. Proper selection of
the important factors can lead to an optimal web page
design. Suppose that there are four choices for the photo-
ash image, eight choices for the main headline, six choic-
es for the subheadline, ve choices for the main text copy,
four choices for the main image, three choices for the back-
ground design, and seven choices for the footer. If we use a
factorial design, web pages for all possible combinations of
these factor levels must be constructed and tested. This is a
total of 
640 web
pages. Obviously, it is not feasible to design and test this
many combinations of web pages, so a complete factorial
experiment cannot be considered. However, a fractional fac-
torial experiment that uses a small number of the possible
web page designs would likely be successful. This experi-
ment would require a fractional factorial where the factors
have different numbers of levels. We will discuss how to
construct these designs in Chapter 9.
4 8 6 5 4 3 7 80,
Designers frequently use computer models to assist them in carrying out their activities.
Examples include nite element models for many aspects of structural and mechanical
design, electrical circuit simulators for integrated circuit design, factory or enterprise-level
models for scheduling and capacity planning or supply chain management, and computer
models of complex chemical processes. Statistically designed experiments can be applied to
these models just as easily and successfully as they can to actual physical systems and will
result in reduced development lead time and better designs.
1.3
Basic Principles
If an experiment such as the ones described in Examples 1.1 through 1.6 is to be performed
most efciently, a scientic approach to planning the experiment must be employed.
Statistical design of experiments refers to the process of planning the experiment so that
appropriate data will be collected and analyzed by statistical methods, resulting in valid
and objective conclusions. The statistical approach to experimental design is necessary if we
wish to draw meaningful conclusions from the data. When the problem involves data that are
subject to experimental errors, statistical methods are the only objective approach to analysis.
Thus, there are two aspects to any experimental problem: the design of the experiment and
the statistical analysis of the data. These two subjects are closely related because the method
