3.4.3
Plot of Residuals Versus Fitted Values
If the model is correct and the assumptions are satised, the residuals should be structureless;
in particular, they should be unrelated to any other variable including the predicted response.
A simple check is to plot the residuals versus the tted values . (For the single-factor exper-
iment model, remember that 
, the ith treatment average.) This plot should not reveal
any obvious pattern. Figure 3.6 plots the residuals versus the tted values for the tensile
strength data of Example 3.1. No unusual structure is apparent.
A defect that occasionally shows up on this plot is nonconstant variance. Sometimes the
variance of the observations increases as the magnitude of the observation increases. This would
be the case if the error or background noise in the experiment was a constant percentage of the
size of the observation. (This commonly happens with many measuring instruments—error is a
percentage of the scale reading.) If this were the case, the residuals would get larger as yij gets
larger, and the plot of residuals versus 
would look like an outward-opening funnel or mega-
phone. Nonconstant variance also arises in cases where the data follow a nonnormal, skewed dis-
tribution because in skewed distributions the variance tends to be a function of the mean.
If the assumption of homogeneity of variances is violated, the F test is only slightly affect-
ed in the balanced (equal sample sizes in all treatments) xed effects model. However, in unbal-
anced designs or in cases where one variance is very much larger than the others, the problem
is more serious. Specically, if the factor levels having the larger variances also have the small-
er sample sizes, the actual type I error rate is larger than anticipated (or condence intervals have
lower actual condence levels than were specied). Conversely, if the factor levels with larger
variances also have the larger sample sizes, the signicance levels are smaller than anticipated
(condence levels are higher). This is a good reason for choosing equal sample sizes whenev-
er possible. For random effects models, unequal error variances can signicantly disturb infer-
ences on variance components even if balanced designs are used.
Inequality of variance also shows up occasionally on the plot of residuals versus run
order. An outward-opening funnel pattern indicates that variability is increasing over time.
This could result from operator/subject fatigue, accumulated stress on equipment, changes in
material properties such as catalyst degradation, or tool wear, or any of a number of causes.
yˆij
yˆij yi.
yˆij
3.4 Model Adequacy Checking
83
–12.65
–25.4
1
4
7
10
13
16
19
12.85
25.6
0.1
Residuals
Run order or time
■F I G U R E 3 . 5
Plot of residuals versus
run order or time
668.05
629.10
Predicted
500.15
551.20
–12.65
–25.4
12.85
25.6
0.1
707.00
Residuals
■F I G U R E 3 . 6
Plot of residuals versus 
ﬁtted values
