10
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
E X A M P L E 1 . 3
Designing a Product—I
A biomedical engineer is designing a new pump for the
intravenous delivery of a drug. The pump should deliver a
constant quantity or dose of the drug over a specied peri-
od of time. She must specify a number of variables or
design parameters. Among these are the diameter and
length of the cylinder, the t between the cylinder and the
plunger, the plunger length, the diameter and wall thickness
of the tube connecting the pump and the needle inserted
into the patient’s vein, the material to use for fabricating
both the cylinder and the tube, and the nominal pressure at
which the system must operate. The impact of some of
these parameters on the design can be evaluated by build-
ing prototypes in which these factors can be varied over
appropriate ranges. Experiments can then be designed and
the prototypes tested to investigate which design parame-
ters are most inuential on pump performance. Analysis of
this information will assist the engineer in arriving at a
design that provides reliable and consistent drug delivery.
E X A M P L E 1 . 4
Designing a Product—II
An engineer is designing an aircraft engine. The engine is a
commercial turbofan, intended to operate in the cruise con-
guration at 40,000 ft and 0.8 Mach. The design parameters
include inlet ow, fan pressure ratio, overall pressure, sta-
tor outlet temperature, and many other factors. The output
response variables in this system are specic fuel consump-
tion and engine thrust. In designing this system, it would be
prohibitive to build prototypes or actual test articles early in
the design process, so the engineers use a computer model
of the system that allows them to focus on the key design
parameters of the engine and to vary them in an effort to
optimize the performance of the engine. Designed experi-
ments can be employed with the computer model of the
engine to determine the most important design parameters
and their optimal settings.
75
80
60%
0.5
140
150
Temperature (°F)
160
170
180
190
200
1.0
1.5
Time (hours)
2.0
2.5
90%
95%
70
78
Path leading
to region of
higher yield
Second optimization experiment
Current
operating
conditions
Initial
optimization
experiment
80%
82
70%
■F I G U R E 1 . 9
Contour plot of yield as a
function of reaction time and reaction temperature,
illustrating experimentation to optimize a process
To locate the optimum, it is necessary to perform an
experiment that varies both time and temperature together,
that is, a factorial experiment. The results of an initial facto-
rial experiment with both time and temperature run at two
levels is shown in Figure 1.9. The responses observed at the
four corners of the square indicate that we should move in
the general direction of increased temperature and decreased
reaction time to increase yield. A few additional runs would
be performed in this direction, and this additional experimen-
tation would lead us to the region of maximum yield.
Once we have found the region of the optimum, a second
experiment would typically be performed. The objective of
this second experiment is to develop an empirical model of
the process and to obtain a more precise estimate of the opti-
mum operating conditions for time and temperature. This
approach to process optimization is called response surface
methodology, and it is explored in detail in Chapter 11. The
second design illustrated in Figure 1.9 is a central compos-
ite design, one of the most important experimental designs
used in process optimization studies.
