22
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
and Wu (1980), Kackar (1985), and Taguchi (1987, 1991)] had a signicant impact on
expanding the interest in and use of designed experiments. Taguchi advocated using designed
experiments for what he termed robust parameter design, or
1. Making processes insensitive to environmental factors or other factors that are dif-
cult to control
2. Making products insensitive to variation transmitted from components
3. Finding levels of the process variables that force the mean to a desired value while
simultaneously reducing variability around this value.
Taguchi suggested highly fractionated factorial designs and other orthogonal arrays along
with some novel statistical methods to solve these problems. The resulting methodology
generated much discussion and controversy. Part of the controversy arose because Taguchi’s
methodology was advocated in the West initially (and primarily) by entrepreneurs, and the
underlying statistical science had not been adequately peer reviewed. By the late 1980s, the
results of peer review indicated that although Taguchi’s engineering concepts and objectives
were well founded, there were substantial problems with his experimental strategy and
methods of data analysis. For specic details of these issues, see Box (1988), Box, Bisgaard,
and Fung (1988), Hunter (1985, 1989), Myers, Montgomery and Anderson-Cook (2009), and
Pignatiello and Ramberg (1992). Many of these concerns are also summarized in the exten-
sive panel discussion in the May 1992 issue of Technometrics [see Nair et al. (1992)].
There were several positive outcomes of the Taguchi controversy. First, designed exper-
iments became more widely used in the discrete parts industries, including automotive and
aerospace manufacturing, electronics and semiconductors, and many other industries that had
previously made little use of the technique. Second, the fourth era of statistical design began.
This era has included a renewed general interest in statistical design by both researchers and
practitioners and the development of many new and useful approaches to experimental prob-
lems in the industrial world, including alternatives to Taguchi’s technical methods that allow
his engineering concepts to be carried into practice efciently and effectively. Some of these
alternatives will be discussed and illustrated in subsequent chapters, particularly in Chapter 12.
Third, computer software for construction and evaluation of designs has improved greatly
with many new features and capability. Forth, formal education in statistical experimental
design is becoming part of many engineering programs in universities, at both undergraduate
and graduate levels. The successful integration of good experimental design practice into
engineering and science is a key factor in future industrial competitiveness.
Applications of designed experiments have grown far beyond the agricultural origins.
There is not a single area of science and engineering that has not successfully employed sta-
tistically designed experiments. In recent years, there has been a considerable utilization of
designed experiments in many other areas, including the service sector of business, nancial
services, government operations, and many nonprot business sectors. An article appeared in
Forbes magazine on March 11, 1996, entitled “The New Mantra: MVT,” where MVT stands
for “multivariable testing,” a term authors use to describe factorial designs. The article notes
the many successes that a diverse group of companies have had through their use of statisti-
cally designed experiments.
1.6
Summary: Using Statistical Techniques in Experimentation
Much of the research in engineering, science, and industry is empirical and makes exten-
sive use of experimentation. Statistical methods can greatly increase the efficiency of
these experiments and often strengthen the conclusions so obtained. The proper use of 
