experimental designs, and it can ultimately be used as a guide for selecting an appro-
priate experimental design for a wide variety of problems.
There are also several interactive statistical software packages that support this
phase of experimental design. The experimenter can enter information about the num-
ber of factors, levels, and ranges, and these programs will either present a selection of
designs for consideration or recommend a particular design. (We usually prefer to see
several alternatives instead of relying entirely on a computer recommendation in most
cases.) Most software packages also provide some diagnostic information about how
each design will perform. This is useful in evaluation of different design alternatives for
the experiment. These programs will usually also provide a worksheet (with the order
of the runs randomized) for use in conducting the experiment.
Design selection also involves thinking about and selecting a tentative empirical
model to describe the results. The model is just a quantitative relationship (equation)
between the response and the important design factors. In many cases, a low-order
polynomial model will be appropriate. A ﬁrst-order model in two variables is 
where y is the response, the x’s are the design factors, the ’s are unknown parame-
ters that will be estimated from the data in the experiment, and 
is a random error
term that accounts for the experimental error in the system that is being studied. The
rst-order model is also sometimes called a main effects model. First-order models
are used extensively in screening or characterization experiments. A common exten-
sion of the rst-order model is to add an interaction term, say
where the cross-product term x1x2 represents the two-factor interaction between the
design factors. Because interactions between factors is relatively common, the rst-
order model with interaction is widely used. Higher-order interactions can also be
included in experiments with more than two factors if necessary. Another widely used
model is the second-order model
Second-order models are often used in optimization experiments.
In selecting the design, it is important to keep the experimental objectives in
mind. In many engineering experiments, we already know at the outset that some of
the factor levels will result in different values for the response. Consequently, we are
interested in identifying which factors cause this difference and in estimating the mag-
nitude of the response change. In other situations, we may be more interested in ver-
ifying uniformity. For example, two production conditions A and B may be compared,
A being the standard and B being a more cost-effective alternative. The experimenter
will then be interested in demonstrating that, say, there is no difference in yield
between the two conditions.
5. Performing the experiment. When running the experiment, it is vital to monitor
the process carefully to ensure that everything is being done according to plan.
Errors in experimental procedure at this stage will usually destroy experimental
validity. One of the most common mistakes that I have encountered is that the peo-
ple conducting the experiment failed to set the variables to the proper levels on
some runs. Someone should be assigned to check factor settings before each run.
Up-front planning to prevent mistakes like this is crucial to success. It is easy to
y 0 1x1 2x2 12x1x2 11x2
11 22x2
2 
y 0 1x1 2x2 12x1x2 

y 0 1x1 2x2 
1.4 Guidelines for Designing Experiments
19
