About the Book
The eighth edition is a major revision of the book. I have tried to maintain the balance
between design and analysis topics of previous editions; however, there are many new topics
and examples, and I have reorganized much of the material. There is much more emphasis on
the computer in this edition.
Design-Expert, JMP, and Minitab Software
During the last few years a number of excellent software products to assist experimenters in
both the design and analysis phases of this subject have appeared. I have included output from
three of these products, Design-Expert, JMP, and Minitab at many points in the text. Minitab
and JMP are widely available general-purpose statistical software packages that have good
data analysis capabilities and that handles the analysis of experiments with both xed and ran-
dom factors (including the mixed model). Design-Expert is a package focused exclusively on
experimental design. All three of these packages have many capabilities for construction and
evaluation of designs and extensive analysis features. Student versions of Design-Expert and
JMP are available as a packaging option with this book, and their use is highly recommend-
ed. I urge all instructors who use this book to incorporate computer software into your
course. (In my course, I bring a laptop computer and use a computer projector in every
lecture, and every design or analysis topic discussed in class is illustrated with the computer.)
To request this book with the student version of JMP or Design-Expert included, contact
your local Wiley representative. You can nd your local Wiley representative by going to
www.wiley.com/college and clicking on the tab for “Who’s My Rep?”
Empirical Model
I have continued to focus on the connection between the experiment and the model that
the experimenter can develop from the results of the experiment. Engineers (and physical,
chemical and life scientists to a large extent) learn about physical mechanisms and their
underlying mechanistic models early in their academic training, and throughout much of
their professional careers they are involved with manipulation of these models.
Statistically designed experiments offer the engineer a valid basis for developing an
empirical model of the system being investigated. This empirical model can then be
manipulated (perhaps through a response surface or contour plot, or perhaps mathemati-
cally) just as any other engineering model. I have discovered through many years of teaching
that this viewpoint is very effective in creating enthusiasm in the engineering community
for statistically designed experiments. Therefore, the notion of an underlying empirical
model for the experiment and response surfaces appears early in the book and receives
much more emphasis.
Factorial Designs
I have expanded the material on factorial and fractional factorial designs (Chapters 5–9) in
an effort to make the material flow more effectively from both the reader’s and the instruc-
tor’s viewpoint and to place more emphasis on the empirical model. There is new material
on a number of important topics, including follow-up experimentation following a fractional
factorial, nonregular and nonorthogonal designs, and small, efficient resolution IV and V
designs. Nonregular fractions as alternatives to traditional minimum aberration fractions in
16 runs and analysis methods for these design are discussed and illustrated.
vi
Preface
