78
Chapter 3 ■Experiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
We could use the ANOVA F test to test H0 : 1 2. Alternatively, we could use a somewhat
different approach. Suppose we consider all the possible ways of allocating the 10 numbers
in the above sample to the two treatments. There are 10!/5!5! 252 possible arrangements
of the 10 observations. If there is no difference in treatment means, all 252 arrangements are
equally likely. For each of the 252 arrangements, we calculate the value of the F statistic using
Equation 3.7. The distribution of these F values is called a randomization distribution, and
a large value of F indicates that the data are not consistent with the hypothesis H0 : 1 2.
For example, if the value of F actually observed was exceeded by only ve of the values of
the randomization distribution, this would correspond to rejection of H0 : 1 2 at a signif-
icance level of 5/252 0.0198 (or 1.98 percent). Notice that no normality assumption is
required in this approach.
The difficulty with this approach is that, even for relatively small problems, it is
computationally prohibitive to enumerate the exact randomization distribution. However,
numerous studies have shown that the exact randomization distribution is well approxi-
mated by the usual normal-theory F distribution. Thus, even without the normality
assumption, the ANOVA F test can be viewed as an approximation to the randomization
test. For further reading on randomization tests in the analysis of variance, see Box,
Hunter, and Hunter (2005).
3.3.3
Estimation of the Model Parameters
We now present estimators for the parameters in the single-factor model
and condence intervals on the treatment means. We will prove later that reasonable estimates
of the overall mean and the treatment effects are given by
(3.11)
These estimators have considerable intuitive appeal; note that the overall mean is estimated
by the grand average of the observations and that any treatment effect is just the difference
between the treatment average and the grand average.
A conﬁdence interval estimate of the ith treatment mean may be easily determined.
The mean of the ith treatment is
A point estimator of i would be 
. Now, if we assume that the errors
are normally distributed, each treatment average 
is distributed NID(i, 2/n). Thus, if 2
were known, we could use the normal distribution to dene the condence interval. Using the
MSE as an estimator of 2, we would base the condence interval on the t distribution.
Therefore, a 100(1 ) percent condence interval on the ith treatment mean i is
(3.12)
Differences in treatments are frequently of great practical interest. A 100(1 ) percent con-
dence interval on the difference in any two treatments means, say i j, would be
(3.13)
yi. yj. t/2,Na
2MSE
n
i j yi. yj. t/2,Na
2MSE
n
yi. t/2,Na
MSE
n
i yi. t/2,Na
MSE
n
yi.
ˆ i ˆ ˆi yi.
i i
iˆ yi. y.., 
 i 1, 2, . . . , a
ˆ y..
yij i ij
