Preface
Audience
This is an introductory textbook dealing with the design and analysis of experiments. It is based
on college-level courses in design of experiments that I have taught over nearly 40 years at
Arizona State University, the University of Washington, and the Georgia Institute of Technology.
It also reects the methods that I have found useful in my own professional practice as an engi-
neering and statistical consultant in many areas of science and engineering, including the research
and development activities required for successful technology commercialization and product
realization.
The book is intended for students who have completed a rst course in statistical meth-
ods. This background course should include at least some techniques of descriptive statistics,
the standard sampling distributions, and an introduction to basic concepts of condence
intervals and hypothesis testing for means and variances. Chapters 10, 11, and 12 require
some familiarity with matrix algebra.
Because the prerequisites are relatively modest, this book can be used in a second course
on statistics focusing on statistical design of experiments for undergraduate students in engi-
neering, the physical and chemical sciences, statistics, mathematics, and other elds of science.
For many years I have taught a course from the book at the rst-year graduate level in engi-
neering. Students in this course come from all of the elds of engineering, materials science,
physics, chemistry, mathematics, operations research life sciences, and statistics. I have also
used this book as the basis of an industrial short course on design of experiments for practic-
ing technical professionals with a wide variety of backgrounds. There are numerous examples
illustrating all of the design and analysis techniques. These examples are based on real-world
applications of experimental design and are drawn from many different elds of engineering and
the sciences. This adds a strong applications flavor to an academic course for engineers
and scientists and makes the book useful as a reference tool for experimenters in a variety
of disciplines.
v
