Fractional factorial designs are used extensively in industrial research and development,
and for process improvement. These designs will be discussed in Chapters 8 and 9.
1.2
Some Typical Applications of Experimental Design
Experimental design methods have found broad application in many disciplines. As noted
previously, we may view experimentation as part of the scientic process and as one of the
ways by which we learn about how systems or processes work. Generally, we learn through
a series of activities in which we make conjectures about a process, perform experiments to
generate data from the process, and then use the information from the experiment to establish
new conjectures, which lead to new experiments, and so on.
Experimental design is a critically important tool in the scientic and engineering
world for improving the product realization process. Critical components of these activities
are in new manufacturing process design and development, and process management. The
application of experimental design techniques early in process development can result in
1. Improved process yields
2. Reduced variability and closer conformance to nominal or target requirements
3. Reduced development time
4. Reduced overall costs.
Experimental design methods are also of fundamental importance in engineering
design activities, where new products are developed and existing ones improved. Some appli-
cations of experimental design in engineering design include
1. Evaluation and comparison of basic design congurations
2. Evaluation of material alternatives
3. Selection of design parameters so that the product will work well under a wide vari-
ety of eld conditions, that is, so that the product is robust
4. Determination of key product design parameters that impact product performance
5. Formulation of new products.
The use of experimental design in product realization can result in products that are easier
to manufacture and that have enhanced field performance and reliability, lower product
cost, and shorter product design and development time. Designed experiments also have
extensive applications in marketing, market research, transactional and service operations,
and general business operations. We now present several examples that illustrate some of
these ideas.
8
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
Walk
Ride
Mode of travel
Driver
Ball
Beverage
■F I G U R E 1 . 8
A four-factor fractional factorial experiment involving
type of driver, type of ball, type of beverage, and mode of travel
