will be included in the experiment (such as wheel speed, gas flow, and vacuum),
while others represent potential areas that will need further study to turn them into
design factors (such as operators following improper procedures), and still others
will probably lead to either factors that will be held constant during the experiment
or blocked (such as temperature and relative humidity). Figure 1.11 is a cause-and-
effect diagram for an experiment to study the effect of several factors on the tur-
bine blades produced on a computer-numerical-controlled (CNC) machine. This
experiment has three response variables: blade profile, blade surface finish, and
surface finish defects in the finished blade. The causes are organized into groups
of controllable factors from which the design factors for the experiment may be
selected, uncontrollable factors whose effects will probably be balanced out by
randomization, nuisance factors that may be blocked, and factors that may be held
constant when the experiment is conducted. It is not unusual for experimenters to
construct several different cause-and-effect diagrams to assist and guide them dur-
ing preexperimental planning. For more information on the CNC machine experi-
ment and further discussion of graphical methods that are useful in preexperimental
planning, see the supplemental text material for this chapter.
We reiterate how crucial it is to bring out all points of view and process infor-
mation in steps 1 through 3. We refer to this as pre-experimental planning. Coleman
and Montgomery (1993) provide worksheets that can be useful in pre-experimental
planning. Also see the supplemental text material for more details and an example
of using these worksheets. It is unlikely that one person has all the knowledge required
to do this adequately in many situations. Therefore, we strongly argue for a team effort
in planning the experiment. Most of your success will hinge on how well the pre-
experimental planning is done.
4. Choice of experimental design.
If the above pre-experimental planning activities are
done correctly, this step is relatively easy. Choice of design involves consideration of
sample size (number of replicates), selection of a suitable run order for the experi-
mental trials, and determination of whether or not blocking or other randomization
restrictions are involved. This book discusses some of the more important types of
18
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
Feed rate
Viscosity of
cutting fluid
Operators
Tool vendor
Temp of cutting
fluid
Held-constant
factors
Nuisance (blocking)
factors
Uncontrollable
factors
Controllable design
factors
Blade profile,
surface finish,
defects
x-axis shift
y-axis shift
Spindle differences
Ambient temp
Titanium properties
z-axis shift
Spindle speed
Fixture height
■F I G U R E 1 . 1 1
A cause-and-effect diagram for the CNC 
machine experiment
