66
Chapter 3 ■Experiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
I
n Chapter 2, we discussed methods for comparing two conditions or treatments. For
example, the Portland cement tension bond experiment involved two different mortar for-
mulations. Another way to describe this experiment is as a single-factor experiment with
two levels of the factor, where the factor is mortar formulation and the two levels are the
two different formulation methods. Many experiments of this type involve more than two
levels of the factor. This chapter focuses on methods for the design and analysis of single-
factor experiments with an arbitrary number a levels of the factor (or a treatments). We will
assume that the experiment has been completely randomized.
3.1
An Example
In many integrated circuit manufacturing steps, wafers are completely coated with a layer of
material such as silicon dioxide or a metal. The unwanted material is then selectively removed
by etching through a mask, thereby creating circuit patterns, electrical interconnects, and
areas in which diffusions or metal depositions are to be made. A plasma etching process is
widely used for this operation, particularly in small geometry applications. Figure 3.1  shows
the important features of a typical single-wafer etching tool. Energy is supplied by a radio-
frequency (RF) generator causing plasma to be generated in the gap between the electrodes.
The chemical species in the plasma are determined by the particular gases used.
Fluorocarbons, such as CF4 (tetrauoromethane) or C2F6 (hexauoroethane), are often used
in plasma etching, but other gases and mixtures of gases are relatively common, depending
on the application.
An engineer is interested in investigating the relationship between the RF power setting
and the etch rate for this tool. The objective of an experiment like this is to model the rela-
tionship between etch rate and RF power, and to specify the power setting that will give a
desired target etch rate. She is interested in a particular gas (C2F6) and gap (0.80 cm) and
wants to test four levels of RF power: 160, 180, 200, and 220 W. She decided to test ve
wafers at each level of RF power.
This is an example of a single-factor experiment with a 4 levels of the factor and 
n 5 replicates. The 20 runs should be made in random order. A very efcient way to gen-
erate the run order is to enter the 20 runs in a spreadsheet (Excel), generate a column of 
random numbers using the RAND ( ) function, and then sort by that column.
Gas supply
Gas control panel
RF
generator
Anode
Wafer
Cathode
Valve
Vacuum pump
■F I G U R E 3 . 1
A single-wafer plasma etching tool
