that
ij are NID(0,
), i ΌΑΔ1, 2. It is customary to refer to ij as the random error compo-
nent of the model. Because the means ΌΑΔ1 and ΌΑΔ2 are constants, we see directly from the model
that yij are NID(ΌΑΔi,
), i ΌΑΔ1, 2, just as we previously assumed. For more information about
models for the data, refer to the supplemental text material.
Statistical Hypotheses. A statistical hypothesis is a statement either about the
parameters of a probability distribution or the parameters of a model. The hypothesis
reflects some conjecture about the problem situation. For example, in the Portland cement
experiment, we may think that the mean tension bond strengths of the two mortar formula-
tions are equal. This may be stated formally as
where ΌΑΔ1 is the mean tension bond strength of the modified mortar and ΌΑΔ2 is the mean ten-
sion bond strength of the unmodified mortar. The statement H0:ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΔΌΑΔ2 is called the null
hypothesis and H1:ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΑΌΑΔ2 is called the alternative hypothesis. The alternative hypothe-
sis specified here is called a two-sided alternative hypothesis because it would be true if
ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΛΌΑΔ2 or if ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΜΌΑΔ2.
To test a hypothesis, we devise a procedure for taking a random sample, computing an
appropriate test statistic, and then rejecting or failing to reject the null hypothesis H0 based
on the computed value of the test statistic. Part of this procedure is specifying the set of val-
ues for the test statistic that leads to rejection of H0. This set of values is called the critical
region or rejection region for the test.
Two kinds of errors may be committed when testing hypotheses. If the null hypothesis
is rejected when it is true, a type I error has occurred. If the null hypothesis is not rejected
when it is false, a type II error has been made. The probabilities of these two errors are given
special symbols
Sometimes it is more convenient to work with the power of the test, where
The general procedure in hypothesis testing is to specify a value of the probability of type I
error ΌΑΘ, often called the signiΎυΒcance level of the test, and then design the test procedure so
that the probability of type II error ΌΑΒhas a suitably small value.
Power ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΑΌΑΒΌΑΔP(reject H0ΌΑΚH0 is false)
ΌΑΒΌΑΔP(type II error) ΌΑΔP(fail to reject H0ΌΑΚH0 is false)
ΌΑΘΌΑΔP(type I error) ΌΑΔP(reject H0ΌΑΚH0 is true)
H1ΌΑΑΌΑΔ1 Z ΌΑΔ2
H0ΌΑΑΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΔΌΑΔ2
ΌΑΑ2
i
ΌΑΗ
ΌΑΑ2
i
ΌΑΗ
2.4 Inferences About the Differences in Means, Randomized Designs
37
Factor level 1
Sample 1: y11, y12,..., y1n1
N(╬╝1, ╧Δ 1
2)
Factor level 2
Sample 2: y21, y22,..., y2n2
╬╝1
╬╝2
╧Δ 1
N(╬╝2, ╧Δ 2
2)
╧Δ 2
έΨιF I G U R E 2 . 9
The sampling situation for the two-sample t-test
