saltwater quenching produces a higher hardness in this particular aluminum alloy than
does oil quenching.
Often when the runs in an experiment are randomized, two (or more) consecutive runs
will have exactly the same levels for some of the factors. For example, suppose we have three
factors in an experiment: pressure, temperature, and time. When the experimental runs are
randomized, we nd the following:
Run number
Pressure (psi)
Temperature (C)
Time (min)
i
30
100
30
i 1
30
125
45
i 2
40
125
45
Notice that between runs i and i 1, the levels of pressure are identical and between runs 
i 1 and i 2, the levels of both temperature and time are identical. To obtain a true repli-
cate, the experimenter needs to “twist the pressure knob” to an intermediate setting between
runs i and i 1, and reset pressure to 30 psi for run i 1. Similarly, temperature and time
should be reset to intermediate levels between runs i 1 and i 2 before being set to their
design levels for run i 2. Part of the experimental error is the variability associated with hit-
ting and holding factor levels.
There is an important distinction between replication and repeated measurements.
For example, suppose that a silicon wafer is etched in a single-wafer plasma etching process,
and a critical dimension (CD) on this wafer is measured three times. These measurements are
not replicates; they are a form of repeated measurements, and in this case the observed vari-
ability in the three repeated measurements is a direct reection of the inherent variability in
the measurement system or gauge and possibly the variability in this CD at different locations
on the wafer where the measurement were taken. As another illustration, suppose that as part
of an experiment in semiconductor manufacturing four wafers are processed simultaneously
in an oxidation furnace at a particular gas ow rate and time and then a measurement is taken
on the oxide thickness of each wafer. Once again, the measurements on the four wafers are
not replicates but repeated measurements. In this case, they reect differences among the
wafers and other sources of variability within that particular furnace run. Replication reects
sources of variability both between runs and (potentially) within runs.
Blocking is a design technique used to improve the precision with which comparisons
among the factors of interest are made. Often blocking is used to reduce or eliminate the vari-
ability transmitted from nuisance factors—that is, factors that may inuence the experimen-
tal response but in which we are not directly interested. For example, an experiment in a
chemical process may require two batches of raw material to make all the required runs.
However, there could be differences between the batches due to supplier-to-supplier variabil-
ity, and if we are not specically interested in this effect, we would think of the batches of
raw material as a nuisance factor. Generally, a block is a set of relatively homogeneous exper-
imental conditions. In the chemical process example, each batch of raw material would form
a block, because the variability within a batch would be expected to be smaller than the vari-
ability between batches. Typically, as in this example, each level of the nuisance factor
becomes a block. Then the experimenter divides the observations from the statistical design
into groups that are run in each block. We study blocking in detail in several places in the text,
including Chapters 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, and 13. A simple example illustrating the blocking prin-
cipal is given in Section 2.5.1.
The three basic principles of experimental design, randomization, replication, and
blocking are part of every experiment. We will illustrate and emphasize them repeatedly
throughout this book.
1.3 Basic Principles
13
