The cumulative frequency scale has been arranged so that if the hypothesized distribution ade-
quately describes the data, the plotted points will fall approximately along a straight line; if the
plotted points deviate signicantly from a straight line, the hypothesized model is not appropri-
ate. Usually, the determination of whether or not the data plot as a straight line is subjective.
To illustrate the procedure, suppose that we wish to check the assumption that tension
bond strength in the Portland cement mortar formulation experiment is normally distributed.
We initially consider only the observations from the unmodied mortar formulation. A
computer-generated normal probability plot is shown in Figure 2.11. Most normal probability
plots present 100(j 0.5)/n on the left vertical scale (and occasionally 100[1(j 0.5)/n] is
plotted on the right vertical scale), with the variable value plotted on the horizontal scale. Some
computer-generated normal probability plots convert the cumulative frequency to a standard
normal z score. A straight line, chosen subjectively, has been drawn through the plotted points.
In drawing the straight line, you should be inuenced more by the points near the middle of
the plot than by the extreme points. A good rule of thumb is to draw the line approximately
between the 25th and 75th percentile points. This is how the lines in Figure 2.11 for each sample
were determined. In assessing the “closeness” of the points to the straight line, imagine a fat
pencil lying along the line. If all the points are covered by this imaginary pencil, a normal
distribution adequately describes the data. Because the points for each sample in Figure 2.11
would pass the fat pencil test, we conclude that the normal distribution is an appropriate model
for tension bond strength for both the modied and the unmodied mortar.
We can obtain an estimate of the mean and standard deviation directly from the normal
probability plot. The mean is estimated as the 50th percentile on the probability plot, and the
standard deviation is estimated as the difference between the 84th and 50th percentiles. This
means that we can verify the assumption of equal population variances in the Portland cement
experiment by simply comparing the slopes of the two straight lines in Figure 2.11. Both lines
have very similar slopes, and so the assumption of equal variances is a reasonable one. If this
assumption is violated, you should use the version of the t-test described in Section 2.4.4. The
supplemental text material has more information about checking assumptions on the t-test.
When assumptions are badly violated, the performance of the t-test will be affected.
Generally, small to moderate violations of assumptions are not a major concern, but any fail-
ure of the independence assumption and strong indications of nonnormality should not be
ignored. Both the signicance level of the test and the ability to detect differences between
the means will be adversely affected by departures from assumptions. Transformations are
one approach to dealing with this problem. We will discuss this in more detail in Chapter 3.
42
Chapter 2 ■Simple Comparative Experiments
■F I G U R E 2 . 1 1
Normal
probability plots of tension bond
strength in the Portland cement
experiment
99
95
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
5
1
16.0
16.4
16.2
16.6
16.8
17.0
Strength (kgf/cm2)
17.2
17.4
17.6
17.8
Percent (cumulative normal probability × 100)
Modified
Variable
Unmodified
