70
Chapter 3 ■Experiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
whether or not they were explicitly considered in the analysis. Here, the i are random vari-
ables, and knowledge about the particular ones investigated is relatively useless. Instead, we
test hypotheses about the variability of the i and try to estimate this variability. This is called
the random effects model or components of variance model. We discuss the single-factor
random effects model in Section 3.9. However, we will defer a more complete discussion of
experiments with random factors to Chapter 13.
3.3
Analysis of the Fixed Effects Model
In this section, we develop the single-factor analysis of variance for the xed effects model.
Recall that yi. represents the total of the observations under the ith treatment. Let 
represent
the average of the observations under the ith treatment. Similarly, let y.. represent the grand
total of all the observations and 
represent the grand average of all the observations.
Expressed symbolically,
(3.3)
where N an is the total number of observations. We see that the “dot” subscript notation
implies summation over the subscript that it replaces.
We are interested in testing the equality of the a treatment means; that is, E(yij) 
i i, i 1, 2, . . . , a. The appropriate hypotheses are
(3.4)
In the effects model, we break the ith treatment mean i into two components such that 
i i. We usually think of as an overall mean so that
This denition implies that
That is, the treatment or factor effects can be thought of as deviations from the overall mean.1
Consequently, an equivalent way to write the above hypotheses is in terms of the treatment
effects i, say
Thus, we speak of testing the equality of treatment means or testing that the treatment effects
(the i) are zero. The appropriate procedure for testing the equality of a treatment means is
the analysis of variance.
H1i Z 0 
 for at least one i
H01 2 Á a 0

a
i1
i 0

a
i1
i
a

H1i Z j 
 for at least one pair (i, j)
H01 2 Á a
y.. 
a
i1 
n
j1
yij y.. y../N
yi. 
n
j1
yij 
 yi. yi./n 
 i 1, 2, . . . , a
y..
yi.
1 For more information on this subject, refer to the supplemental text material for Chapter 3.
