1
C H A P T E R
1
I n t r o d u c t i o n
CHAPTER OUTLINE
1.1 STRATEGY OF EXPERIMENTATION
1.2 SOME TYPICAL APPLICATIONS 
OF EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
1.3 BASIC PRINCIPLES
1.4 GUIDELINES FOR DESIGNING EXPERIMENTS
1.5 A BRIEF HISTORY OF STATISTICAL DESIGN
1.6 SUMMARY: USING STATISTICAL TECHNIQUES
IN EXPERIMENTATION
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL FOR CHAPTER 1
S1.1 More about Planning Experiments
S1.2 Blank Guide Sheets to Assist in Pre-Experimental
Planning
S1.3 Montgomery’s Theorems on Designed Experiments
1.1
Strategy of Experimentation
Observing a system or process while it is in operation is an important part of the learning
process, and is an integral part of understanding and learning about how systems and
processes work. The great New York Yankees catcher Yogi Berra said that “. . . you can
observe a lot just by watching.” However, to understand what happens to a process when
you change certain input factors, you have to do more than just watch—you actually have
to change the factors. This means that to really understand cause-and-effect relationships in
a system you must deliberately change the input variables to the system and observe the
changes in the system output that these changes to the inputs produce. In other words, you
need to conduct experiments on the system. Observations on a system or process can lead
to theories or hypotheses about what makes the system work, but experiments of the type
described above are required to demonstrate that these theories are correct.
Investigators perform experiments in virtually all elds of inquiry, usually to discover
something about a particular process or system. Each experimental run is a test. More formally,
we can dene an experiment as a test or series of runs in which purposeful changes are made
to the input variables of a process or system so that we may observe and identify the reasons
for changes that may be observed in the output response. We may want to determine which
input variables are responsible for the observed changes in the response, develop a model
relating the response to the important input variables and to use this model for process or system
improvement or other decision-making.
This book is about planning and conducting experiments and about analyzing the
resulting data so that valid and objective conclusions are obtained. Our focus is on experi-
ments in engineering and science. Experimentation plays an important role in technology
The supplemental material is on the textbook website www.wiley.com/college/montgomery.
