with a wide array of audiences, and some more advanced design courses could possibly benet
from including several of the supplemental text material topics. This material is in electronic form
on the World Wide Website for this book, located at www.wiley.com/college/montgomery.
Website
Current supporting material for instructors and students is available at the website
www.wiley.com/college/montgomery. This site will be used to communicate information
about innovations and recommendations for effectively using this text. The supplemental text
material described above is available at the site, along with electronic versions of data sets
used for examples and homework problems, a course syllabus, and some representative stu-
dent term projects from the course at Arizona State University.
Student Companion Site
The student’s section of the textbook website contains the following:
1. The supplemental text material described above
2. Data sets from the book examples and homework problems, in electronic form
3. Sample Student Projects
Instructor Companion Site
The instructor’s section of the textbook website contains the following:
4. Solutions to the text problems
5. The supplemental text material described above
6. PowerPoint lecture slides
7. Figures from the text in electronic format, for easy inclusion in lecture slides
8. Data sets from the book examples and homework problems, in electronic form
9. Sample Syllabus
10. Sample Student Projects
The instructor’s section is for instructor use only, and is password-protected. Visit the
Instructor Companion Site portion of the website, located at www.wiley.com/college/
montgomery, to register for a password.
Student Solutions Manual
The purpose of the Student Solutions Manual is to provide the student with an in-depth under-
standing of how to apply the concepts presented in the textbook. Along with detailed instruc-
tions on how to solve the selected chapter exercises, insights from practical applications are
also shared.
Solutions have been provided for problems selected by the author of the text.
Occasionally a group of “continued exercises” is presented and provides the student with a
full solution for a specic data set. Problems that are included in the Student Solutions
Manual are indicated by an icon appearing in the text margin next to the problem statement.
This is an excellent study aid that many text users will nd extremely helpful. The
Student Solutions Manual may be ordered in a set with the text, or purchased separately.
Contact your local Wiley representative to request the set for your bookstore, or purchase the
Student Solutions Manual from the Wiley website.
viii
Preface
