2.2
Basic Statistical Concepts
Each of the observations in the Portland cement experiment described above would be called
a run. Notice that the individual runs differ, so there is uctuation, or noise, in the observed
bond strengths. This noise is usually called experimental error or simply error. It is a sta-
tistical error, meaning that it arises from variation that is uncontrolled and generally
unavoidable. The presence of error or noise implies that the response variable, tension bond
strength, is a random variable. A random variable may be either discrete or continuous. If
the set of all possible values of the random variable is either nite or countably innite, then
the random variable is discrete, whereas if the set of all possible values of the random variable
is an interval, then the random variable is continuous.
Graphical Description of Variability. We often use simple graphical methods to
assist in analyzing the data from an experiment. The dot diagram, illustrated in Figure 2.1, is
a very useful device for displaying a small body of data (say up to about 20 observations). The
dot diagram enables the experimenter to see quickly the general location or central tendency
of the observations and their spread or variability. For example, in the Portland cement tension
bond experiment, the dot diagram reveals that the two formulations may differ in mean strength
but that both formulations produce about the same variability in strength.
If the data are fairly numerous, the dots in a dot diagram become difcult to distinguish
and a histogram may be preferable. Figure 2.2 presents a histogram for 200 observations on the
metal recovery, or yield, from a smelting process. The histogram shows the central tendency,
spread, and general shape of the distribution of the data. Recall that a histogram is constructed
by dividing the horizontal axis into bins (usually of equal length) and drawing a rectangle over
the jth bin with the area of the rectangle proportional to nj, the number of observations that fall
in that bin. The histogram is a large-sample tool. When the sample size is small the shape of the
histogram can be very sensitive to the number of bins, the width of the bins, and the starting
value for the rst bin. Histograms should not be used with fewer than 75–100 observations.
The box plot (or box-and-whisker plot) is a very useful way to display data. A box
plot displays the minimum, the maximum, the lower and upper quartiles (the 25th percentile
and the 75th percentile, respectively), and the median (the 50th percentile) on a rectangular
box aligned either horizontally or vertically. The box extends from the lower quartile to the
2.2 Basic Statistical Concepts
27
60
10
20
30
0.05
0.00
0.10
0.15
65
70
75
Metal recovery (yield)
Frequency
Relative frequency
80
85
■F I G U R E 2 . 2
Histogram for 200 observations on metal recovery (yield) from 
a smelting process
