1.1 Strategy of Experimentation
3
In general, experiments are used to study the performance of processes and systems.
The process or system can be represented by the model shown in Figure 1.1. We can usually
visualize the process as a combination of operations, machines, methods, people, and other
resources that transforms some input (often a material) into an output that has one or more
observable response variables. Some of the process variables and material properties x1,
x2, . . . , xp are controllable, whereas other variables z1, z2, . . . , zq are uncontrollable
(although they may be controllable for purposes of a test). The objectives of the experiment
may include the following:
1. Determining which variables are most inuential on the response y
2. Determining where to set the inuential x’s so that y is almost always near the
desired nominal value
3. Determining where to set the inuential x’s so that variability in y is small
4. Determining where to set the inuential x’s so that the effects of the uncontrollable
variables z1, z2, . . . , zq are minimized.
As you can see from the foregoing discussion, experiments often involve several factors.
Usually, an objective of the experimenter is to determine the inuence that these factors have
on the output response of the system. The general approach to planning and conducting the
experiment is called the strategy of experimentation. An experimenter can use several strate-
gies. We will illustrate some of these with a very simple example.
I really like to play golf. Unfortunately, I do not enjoy practicing, so I am always look-
ing for a simpler solution to lowering my score. Some of the factors that I think may be impor-
tant, or that may inuence my golf score, are as follows:
1. The type of driver used (oversized or regular sized)
2. The type of ball used (balata or three piece)
3. Walking and carrying the golf clubs or riding in a golf cart
4. Drinking water or drinking “something else” while playing
5. Playing in the morning or playing in the afternoon
6. Playing when it is cool or playing when it is hot
7. The type of golf shoe spike worn (metal or soft)
8. Playing on a windy day or playing on a calm day.
Obviously, many other factors could be considered, but let’s assume that these are the ones of pri-
mary interest. Furthermore, based on long experience with the game, I decide that factors 5
through 8 can be ignored; that is, these factors are not important because their effects are so small
Inputs
Controllable factors
Uncontrollable factors
Output
Process
y
xp
x2
x1
zq
z2
z1
■F I G U R E 1 . 1
General model of a 
process or system
