as shown in Figure 1.6. Notice that there are eight test combinations of these three factors
across the two levels of each and that these eight trials can be represented geometrically as
the corners of a cube. This is an example of a 23 factorial design. Because I only want to
play eight rounds of golf, this experiment would require that one round be played at each
combination of factors represented by the eight corners of the cube in Figure 1.6. However,
if we compare this to the two-factor factorial in Figure 1.4, the 23 factorial design would pro-
vide the same information about the factor effects. For example, there are four tests in both
designs that provide information about the regular-sized driver and four tests that provide
information about the oversized driver, assuming that each run in the two-factor design in
Figure 1.4 is replicated twice.
Figure 1.7 illustrates how all four factors—driver, ball, beverage, and mode of travel
(walking or riding)—could be investigated in a 24 factorial design. As in any factorial design,
all possible combinations of the levels of the factors are used. Because all four factors are at
two levels, this experimental design can still be represented geometrically as a cube (actually
a hypercube).
Generally, if there are k factors, each at two levels, the factorial design would require 2k
runs. For example, the experiment in Figure 1.7 requires 16 runs. Clearly, as the number of
factors of interest increases, the number of runs required increases rapidly; for instance, a
10-factor experiment with all factors at two levels would require 1024 runs. This quickly
becomes infeasible from a time and resource viewpoint. In the golf experiment, I can only
play eight rounds of golf, so even the experiment in Figure 1.7 is too large.
Fortunately, if there are four to ve or more factors, it is usually unnecessary to run all
possible combinations of factor levels. A fractional factorial experiment is a variation of the
basic factorial design in which only a subset of the runs is used. Figure 1.8 shows a fractional
factorial design for the four-factor version of the golf experiment. This design requires only
8 runs instead of the original 16 and would be called a one-half fraction. If I can play only
eight rounds of golf, this is an excellent design in which to study all four factors. It will provide
good information about the main effects of the four factors as well as some information about
how these factors interact.
1.1 Strategy of Experimentation
7
Driver
Ball
Beverage
■F I G U R E 1 . 6
A three-factor
factorial experiment involving type of
driver, type of ball, and type of beverage
Walk
Ride
Mode of travel
Driver
Ball
Beverage
■F I G U R E 1 . 7
A four-factor factorial experiment involving type
of driver, type of ball, type of beverage, and mode of travel
