80
Chapter 3 ■Experiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
There are two advantages in choosing a balanced design. First, the test statistic is rela-
tively insensitive to small departures from the assumption of equal variances for the a treat-
ments if the sample sizes are equal. This is not the case for unequal sample sizes. Second, the
power of the test is maximized if the samples are of equal size.
3.4
Model Adequacy Checking
The decomposition of the variability in the observations through an analysis of variance identity
(Equation 3.6) is a purely algebraic relationship. However, the use of the partitioning to test for-
mally for no differences in treatment means requires that certain assumptions be satised.
Specically, these assumptions are that the observations are adequately described by the model
and that the errors are normally and independently distributed with mean zero and constant
but unknown variance 2. If these assumptions are valid, the analysis of variance procedure
is an exact test of the hypothesis of no difference in treatment means.
In practice, however, these assumptions will usually not hold exactly. Consequently, it is
usually unwise to rely on the analysis of variance until the validity of these assumptions has
been checked. Violations of the basic assumptions and model adequacy can be easily investigated
by the examination of residuals. We dene the residual for observation j in treatment i as
(3.16)
where 
is an estimate of the corresponding observation yij obtained as follows:
(3.17)
Equation 3.17 gives the intuitively appealing result that the estimate of any observation in the
ith treatment is just the corresponding treatment average.
Examination of the residuals should be an automatic part of any analysis of variance. If
the model is adequate, the residuals should be structureless; that is, they should contain no
obvious patterns. Through analysis of residuals, many types of model inadequacies and vio-
lations of the underlying assumptions can be discovered. In this section, we show how model
diagnostic checking can be done easily by graphical analysis of residuals and how to deal
with several commonly occurring abnormalities.
3.4.1
The Normality Assumption
A check of the normality assumption could be made by plotting a histogram of the residuals.
If the NID(0, 2) assumption on the errors is satised, this plot should look like a sample from
a normal distribution centered at zero. Unfortunately, with small samples, considerable uc-
tuation in the shape of a histogram often occurs, so the appearance of a moderate departure
from normality does not necessarily imply a serious violation of the assumptions. Gross devi-
ations from normality are potentially serious and require further analysis.
An extremely useful procedure is to construct a normal probability plot of the resid-
uals. Recall from Chapter 2 that we used a normal probability plot of the raw data to check
the assumption of normality when using the t-test. In the analysis of variance, it is usually
more effective (and straightforward) to do this with the residuals. If the underlying error dis-
tribution is normal, this plot will resemble a straight line. In visualizing the straight line, place
more emphasis on the central values of the plot than on the extremes.
yi.
y.. (yi. y..)
ˆyij ˆ ˆi
yˆij
eij yij yˆij
yij i ij
