Once the experimenter has selected the design factors, he or she must choose
the ranges over which these factors will be varied and the specic levels at which runs
will be made. Thought must also be given to how these factors are to be controlled at
the desired values and how they are to be measured. For instance, in the ow solder
experiment, the engineer has dened 12 variables that may affect the occurrence of
solder defects. The experimenter will also have to decide on a region of interest for
each variable (that is, the range over which each factor will be varied) and on how
many levels of each variable to use. Process knowledge is required to do this. This
process knowledge is usually a combination of practical experience and theoretical
understanding. It is important to investigate all factors that may be of importance and
to be not overly inuenced by past experience, particularly when we are in the early
stages of experimentation or when the process is not very mature.
When the objective of the experiment is factor screening or process charac-
terization, it is usually best to keep the number of factor levels low. Generally, two
levels work very well in factor screening studies. Choosing the region of interest is
also important. In factor screening, the region of interest should be relatively large—
that is, the range over which the factors are varied should be broad. As we learn more
about which variables are important and which levels produce the best results, the
region of interest in subsequent experiments will usually become narrower.
The cause-and-effect diagram can be a useful technique for organizing
some of the information generated in pre-experimental planning. Figure 1.10 is the
cause-and-effect diagram constructed while planning an experiment to resolve
problems with wafer charging (a charge accumulation on the wafers) encountered
in an etching tool used in semiconductor manufacturing. The cause-and-effect dia-
gram is also known as a fishbone diagram because the “effect” of interest or the
response variable is drawn along the spine of the diagram and the potential causes
or design factors are organized in a series of ribs. The cause-and-effect diagram
uses the traditional causes of measurement, materials, people, environment, meth-
ods, and machines to organize the information and potential design factors. Notice
that some of the individual causes will probably lead directly to a design factor that
1.4 Guidelines for Designing Experiments
17
Charge monitor
calibration
Charge monitor
wafer probe failure
Faulty hardware
readings
Incorrect part
materials
Parts condition
Humid/Temp
Time parts exposed
to atmosphere
Improper procedures
Water flow to flood gun
Flood gun
installation
Flood gun rebuild
procedure
Parts cleaning
procedure
Wheel speed
Gas flow
Vacuum
Machines
Methods
Environment
Measurement
Materials
People
Wafer charging
Unfamiliarity with normal
wear conditions
■F I G U R E 1 . 1 0
A cause-and-effect diagram for the etching process 
experiment
