Because sample runs that differ as a result of experimental error often are well
described by the normal distribution, the normal plays a central role in the analysis of data
from designed experiments. Many important sampling distributions may also be dened in
terms of normal random variables. We often use the notation y ~ N(, 2) to denote that y is
distributed normally with mean and variance 2.
An important special case of the normal distribution is the standard normal distribu-
tion; that is, 0 and 2 1. We see that if y ~ N(, 2), the random variable
(2.13)
follows the standard normal distribution, denoted z ~ N(0, 1). The operation demonstrated in
Equation 2.13 is often called standardizing the normal random variable y. The cumulative
standard normal distribution is given in Table I of the Appendix.
Many statistical techniques assume that the random variable is normally distributed.
The central limit theorem is often a justication of approximate normality.
z y 

2.3 Sampling and Sampling Distributions
33
μ
σ 2
■F I G U R E 2 . 5
The normal distribution
THEOREM 2-1
The Central Limit Theorem
If y1, y2, . . . , yn is a sequence of n independent and identically distributed random vari-
ables with E(yi) and V(yi) 2 (both nite) and x y1 y2  
yn, then the
limiting form of the distribution of
as n
, is the standard normal distribution.

l
zn x n
n2
Á
This result states essentially that the sum of n independent and identically distributed
random variables is approximately normally distributed. In many cases, this approximation is
good for very small n, say n 10, whereas in other cases large n is required, say n 100.
Frequently, we think of the error in an experiment as arising in an additive manner from sev-
eral independent sources; consequently, the normal distribution becomes a plausible model
for the combined experimental error.
An important sampling distribution that can be dened in terms of normal random vari-
ables is the chi-square or
2 distribution. If z1, z2, . . . , zk are normally and independently
distributed random variables with mean 0 and variance 1, abbreviated NID(0, 1), then the ran-
dom variable
x z2
1 z2
2 Á z2
k

