1.2 Some Typical Applications of Experimental Design
9
E X A M P L E 1 . 2
Optimizing a Process
In a characterization experiment, we are usually interested
in determining which process variables affect the response.
A logical next step is to optimize, that is, to determine the
region in the important factors that leads to the best possi-
ble response. For example, if the response is yield, we
would look for a region of maximum yield, whereas if the
response is variability in a critical product dimension, we
would seek a region of minimum variability.
Suppose that we are interested in improving the yield
of a chemical process. We know from the results of a char-
acterization experiment that the two most important
process variables that influence the yield are operating
temperature and reaction time. The process currently runs
at 145°F and 2.1 hours of reaction time, producing yields
of around 80 percent. Figure 1.9 shows a view of the
time–temperature region from above. In this graph, the
lines of constant yield are connected to form response
contours, and we have shown the contour lines for yields
of 60, 70, 80, 90, and 95 percent. These contours are pro-
jections on the time–temperature region of cross sections
of the yield surface corresponding to the aforementioned
percent yields. This surface is sometimes called a
response surface. The true response surface in Figure 1.9
is unknown to the process personnel, so experimental
methods will be required to optimize the yield with
respect to time and temperature.
E X A M P L E 1 . 1
Characterizing a Process
A ow solder machine is used in the manufacturing process
for printed circuit boards. The machine cleans the boards in
a ux, preheats the boards, and then moves them along a
conveyor through a wave of molten solder. This solder
process makes the electrical and mechanical connections
for the leaded components on the board.
The process currently operates around the 1 percent defec-
tive level. That is, about 1 percent of the solder joints on a
board are defective and require manual retouching. However,
because the average printed circuit board contains over 2000
solder joints, even a 1 percent defective level results in far too
many solder joints requiring rework. The process engineer
responsible for this area would like to use a designed experi-
ment to determine which machine parameters are inuential
in the occurrence of solder defects and which adjustments
should be made to those variables to reduce solder defects.
The ow solder machine has several variables that can
be controlled. They include
1. Solder temperature
2. Preheat temperature
3. Conveyor speed
4. Flux type
5. Flux specic gravity
6. Solder wave depth
7. Conveyor angle.
In addition to these controllable factors, several other factors
cannot be easily controlled during routine manufacturing,
although they could be controlled for the purposes of a test.
They are
1. Thickness of the printed circuit board
2. Types of components used on the board
3. Layout of the components on the board
4. Operator
5. Production rate.
In this situation, engineers are interested in character-
izing the ow solder machine; that is, they want to deter-
mine which factors (both controllable and uncontrollable)
affect the occurrence of defects on the printed circuit
boards. To accomplish this, they can design an experiment
that will enable them to estimate the magnitude and direc-
tion of the factor effects; that is, how much does the
response variable (defects per unit) change when each fac-
tor is changed, and does changing the factors together
produce different results than are obtained from individual
factor adjustments—that is, do the factors interact?
Sometimes we call an experiment such as this a screening
experiment. Typically, screening or characterization exper-
iments involve using fractional factorial designs, such as in
the golf example in Figure 1.8.
The information from this screening or characterization
experiment will be used to identify the critical process fac-
tors and to determine the direction of adjustment for these
factors to reduce further the number of defects per unit. The
experiment may also provide information about which fac-
tors should be more carefully controlled during routine man-
ufacturing to prevent high defect levels and erratic process
performance. Thus, one result of the experiment could be the
application of techniques such as control charts to one or
more process variables (such as solder temperature), in
addition to control charts on process output. Over time, if the
process is improved enough, it may be possible to base most
of the process control plan on controlling process input vari-
ables instead of control charting the output.
