Nonparametric hypothesis testing procedures can also be used if the observations come from
nonnormal populations. Refer to Montgomery and Runger (2011) for more details.
An Alternate Justication to the t-Test. The two-sample t-test we have just present-
ed depends in theory on the underlying assumption that the two populations from which the
samples were randomly selected are normal. Although the normality assumption is required to
develop the test procedure formally, as we discussed above, moderate departures from normal-
ity will not seriously affect the results. It can be argued that the use of a randomized design
enables one to test hypotheses without any assumptions regarding the form of the distribution.
Briey, the reasoning is as follows. If the treatments have no effect, all [20!/(10!10!)] 
184,756 possible ways that the 20 observations could occur are equally likely. Corresponding
to each of these 184,756 possible arrangements is a value of t0. If the value of t0 actually
obtained from the data is unusually large or unusually small with reference to the set of
184,756 possible values, it is an indication that 1 2.
This type of procedure is called a randomization test. It can be shown that the t-test is
a good approximation of the randomization test. Thus, we will use t-tests (and other procedures
that can be regarded as approximations of randomization tests) without extensive concern
about the assumption of normality. This is one reason a simple procedure such as normal prob-
ability plotting is adequate to check the assumption of normality.
2.4.2
Conﬁdence Intervals
Although hypothesis testing is a useful procedure, it sometimes does not tell the entire story. It is
often preferable to provide an interval within which the value of the parameter or parameters in
question would be expected to lie. These interval statements are called conﬁdence intervals. In
many engineering and industrial experiments, the experimenter already knows that the means 1
and 2 differ; consequently, hypothesis testing on 1 2 is of little interest. The experimenter
would usually be more interested in knowing how much the means differ. A condence interval
on the difference in means 1 2is used in answering this question.
To dene a condence interval, suppose that is an unknown parameter. To obtain an
interval estimate of , we need to nd two statistics L and U such that the probability statement
(2.27)
is true. The interval
(2.28)
is called a 100(1 !) percent conﬁdence interval for the parameter . The interpretation
of this interval is that if, in repeated random samplings, a large number of such intervals are
constructed, 100(1 ) percent of them will contain the true value of . The statistics L and
U are called the lower and upper conﬁdence limits, respectively, and 1 is called the
conﬁdence coefﬁcient. If 0.05, Equation 2.28 is called a 95 percent condence interval
for . Note that condence intervals have a frequency interpretation; that is, we do not know
if the statement is true for this specic sample, but we do know that the method used to
produce the condence interval yields correct statements 100(1 ) percent of the time.
Suppose that we wish to nd a 100(1 ) percent condence interval on the true dif-
ference in means 1 2 for the Portland cement problem. The interval can be derived in the
following way. The statistic
is distributed as 
. Thus,
tn1n22
y1 y2 (1 2)
Sp
1
n1 1
n2



L U
P(L U) 1 
2.4 Inferences About the Differences in Means, Randomized Designs
43
