Additional Important Changes
I have added a lot of material on optimal designs and their application. The chapter on response
surfaces (Chapter 11) has several new topics and problems. I have expanded Chapter 12 on
robust parameter design and process robustness experiments. Chapters 13 and 14 discuss
experiments involving random effects and some applications of these concepts to nested and
split-plot designs. The residual maximum likelihood method is now widely available in soft-
ware and I have emphasized this technique throughout the book. Because there is expanding
industrial interest in nested and split-plot designs, Chapters 13 and 14 have several new topics.
Chapter 15 is an overview of important design and analysis topics: nonnormality of the
response, the Box–Cox method for selecting the form of a transformation, and other alterna-
tives; unbalanced factorial experiments; the analysis of covariance, including covariates in a
factorial design, and repeated measures. I have also added new examples and problems from
various elds, including biochemistry and biotechnology.
Experimental Design
Throughout the book I have stressed the importance of experimental design as a tool for engi-
neers and scientists to use for product design and development as well as process develop-
ment and improvement. The use of experimental design in developing products that are robust
to environmental factors and other sources of variability is illustrated. I believe that the use of
experimental design early in the product cycle can substantially reduce development lead time
and cost, leading to processes and products that perform better in the eld and have higher
reliability than those developed using other approaches.
The book contains more material than can be covered comfortably in one course, and I
hope that instructors will be able to either vary the content of each course offering or discuss
some topics in greater depth, depending on class interest. There are problem sets at the end
of each chapter. These problems vary in scope from computational exercises, designed to
reinforce the fundamentals, to extensions or elaboration of basic principles.
Course Suggestions
My own course focuses extensively on factorial and fractional factorial designs. Consequently,
I usually cover Chapter 1, Chapter 2 (very quickly), most of Chapter 3, Chapter 4 (excluding
the material on incomplete blocks and only mentioning Latin squares briey), and I discuss
Chapters 5 through 8 on factorials and two-level factorial and fractional factorial designs in
detail. To conclude the course, I introduce response surface methodology (Chapter 11) and give
an overview of random effects models (Chapter 13) and nested and split-plot designs (Chapter
14). I always require the students to complete a term project that involves designing, conduct-
ing, and presenting the results of a statistically designed experiment. I require them to do this
in teams because this is the way that much industrial experimentation is conducted. They must
present the results of this project, both orally and in written form.
The Supplemental Text Material
For the eighth edition I have prepared supplemental text material for each chapter of the book.
Often, this supplemental material elaborates on topics that could not be discussed in greater detail
in the book. I have also presented some subjects that do not appear directly in the book, but an
introduction to them could prove useful to some students and professional practitioners. Some of
this material is at a higher mathematical level than the text. I realize that instructors use this book
Preface
vii
