Acknowledgments
I express my appreciation to the many students, instructors, and colleagues who have used the six
earlier editions of this book and who have made helpful suggestions for its revision. The contri-
butions of
Dr. Raymond H. Myers,
Dr. G. Geoffrey Vining,
Dr. Brad Jones,
Dr. Christine Anderson-Cook, Dr. Connie M. Borror, Dr. Scott Kowalski, Dr. Dennis Lin,
Dr. John Ramberg, Dr. Joseph Pignatiello, Dr. Lloyd S. Nelson, Dr. Andre Khuri, Dr. Peter
Nelson, Dr. John A. Cornell, Dr. Saeed Maghsoodlo, Dr. Don Holcomb, Dr. George C. Runger,
Dr. Bert Keats, Dr. Dwayne Rollier, Dr. Norma Hubele, Dr. Murat Kulahci, Dr. Cynthia Lowry,
Dr. Russell G. Heikes, Dr. Harrison M. Wadsworth, Dr. William W. Hines, Dr. Arvind Shah,
Dr. Jane Ammons, Dr. Diane Schaub, Mr. Mark Anderson, Mr. Pat Whitcomb, Dr. Pat Spagon,
and Dr. William DuMouche were particularly valuable. My current and former Department
Chairs, Dr. Ron Askin and Dr. Gary Hogg, have provided an intellectually stimulating environ-
ment in which to work.
The contributions of the professional practitioners with whom I have worked have been
invaluable. It is impossible to mention everyone, but some of the major contributors include
Dr. Dan McCarville of Mindspeed Corporation, Dr. Lisa Custer of the George Group; 
Dr. Richard Post of Intel; Mr. Tom Bingham, Mr. Dick Vaughn, Dr. Julian Anderson,
Mr. Richard Alkire, and Mr. Chase Neilson of the Boeing Company; Mr. Mike Goza, Mr. Don
Walton, Ms. Karen Madison, Mr. Jeff Stevens, and Mr. Bob Kohm of Alcoa; Dr. Jay Gardiner,
Mr. John Butora, Mr. Dana Lesher, Mr. Lolly Marwah, Mr. Leon Mason of IBM; Dr. Paul
Tobias of IBM and Sematech; Ms. Elizabeth A. Peck of The Coca-Cola Company; Dr. Sadri
Khalessi and Mr. Franz Wagner of Signetics; Mr. Robert V. Baxley of Monsanto Chemicals;
Mr. Harry Peterson-Nedry and Dr. Russell Boyles of Precision Castparts Corporation; 
Mr. Bill New and Mr. Randy Schmid of Allied-Signal Aerospace; Mr. John M. Fluke, Jr. of
the John Fluke Manufacturing Company; Mr. Larry Newton and Mr. Kip Howlett of Georgia-
Pacic; and Dr. Ernesto Ramos of BBN Software Products Corporation.
I am indebted to Professor E. S. Pearson and the Biometrika Trustees, John Wiley &
Sons, Prentice Hall, The American Statistical Association, The Institute of Mathematical
Statistics, and the editors of Biometrics for permission to use copyrighted material. Dr. Lisa
Custer and Dr. Dan McCorville did an excellent job of preparing the solutions that appear in
the Instructor’s Solutions Manual, and Dr. Cheryl Jennings and Dr. Sarah Streett provided
effective and very helpful proofreading assistance. I am grateful to NASA, the Ofce of
Naval Research, the National Science Foundation, the member companies of the
NSF/Industry/University Cooperative Research Center in Quality and Reliability Engineering
at Arizona State University, and the IBM Corporation for supporting much of my research
in engineering statistics and experimental design.
DOUGLAS C. MONTGOMERY
TEMPE, ARIZONA
Preface
ix
