that they have no practical value. Engineers, scientists, and business analysts, often must make
these types of decisions about some of the factors they are considering in real experiments.
Now, let’s consider how factors 1 through 4 could be experimentally tested to determine
their effect on my golf score. Suppose that a maximum of eight rounds of golf can be played
over the course of the experiment. One approach would be to select an arbitrary combination
of these factors, test them, and see what happens. For example, suppose the oversized driver,
balata ball, golf cart, and water combination is selected, and the resulting score is 87. During
the round, however, I noticed several wayward shots with the big driver (long is not always
good in golf), and, as a result, I decide to play another round with the regular-sized driver,
holding the other factors at the same levels used previously. This approach could be contin-
ued almost indenitely, switching the levels of one or two (or perhaps several) factors for the
next test, based on the outcome of the current test. This strategy of experimentation, which
we call the best-guess approach, is frequently used in practice by engineers and scientists. It
often works reasonably well, too, because the experimenters often have a great deal of tech-
nical or theoretical knowledge of the system they are studying, as well as considerable prac-
tical experience. The best-guess approach has at least two disadvantages. First, suppose the
initial best-guess does not produce the desired results. Now the experimenter has to take
another guess at the correct combination of factor levels. This could continue for a long time,
without any guarantee of success. Second, suppose the initial best-guess produces an accept-
able result. Now the experimenter is tempted to stop testing, although there is no guarantee
that the best solution has been found.
Another strategy of experimentation that is used extensively in practice is the one-
factor-at-a-time (OFAT) approach. The OFAT method consists of selecting a starting point,
or baseline set of levels, for each factor, and then successively varying each factor over its
range with the other factors held constant at the baseline level. After all tests are performed,
a series of graphs are usually constructed showing how the response variable is affected by
varying each factor with all other factors held constant. Figure 1.2 shows a set of these graphs
for the golf experiment, using the oversized driver, balata ball, walking, and drinking water
levels of the four factors as the baseline. The interpretation of this graph is straightforward;
for example, because the slope of the mode of travel curve is negative, we would conclude
that riding improves the score. Using these one-factor-at-a-time graphs, we would select the
optimal combination to be the regular-sized driver, riding, and drinking water. The type of
golf ball seems unimportant.
The major disadvantage of the OFAT strategy is that it fails to consider any possible
interaction between the factors. An interaction is the failure of one factor to produce the same
effect on the response at different levels of another factor. Figure 1.3 shows an interaction
between the type of driver and the beverage factors for the golf experiment. Notice that if I use
the regular-sized driver, the type of beverage consumed has virtually no effect on the score, but
if I use the oversized driver, much better results are obtained by drinking water instead of beer.
Interactions between factors are very common, and if they occur, the one-factor-at-a-time strat-
egy will usually produce poor results. Many people do not recognize this, and, consequently,
4
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
Driver
Score
O
R
Ball
Score
B
T
Mode of travel
Score
W
R
Beverage
Score
W
SE
■F I G U R E 1 . 2
Results of the one-factor-at-a-time strategy for the golf experiment
