statistical techniques in experimentation requires that the experimenter keep the following
points in mind:
1. Use your nonstatistical knowledge of the problem. Experimenters are usually
highly knowledgeable in their elds. For example, a civil engineer working on a
problem in hydrology typically has considerable practical experience and formal
academic training in this area. In some elds, there is a large body of physical the-
ory on which to draw in explaining relationships between factors and responses.
This type of nonstatistical knowledge is invaluable in choosing factors, determining
factor levels, deciding how many replicates to run, interpreting the results of the
analysis, and so forth. Using a designed experiment is no substitute for thinking
about the problem.
2. Keep the design and analysis as simple as possible. Don’t be overzealous in the use
of complex, sophisticated statistical techniques. Relatively simple design and analysis
methods are almost always best. This is a good place to reemphasize steps 1–3 of the
procedure recommended in Section 1.4. If you do the pre-experiment planning care-
fully and select a reasonable design, the analysis will almost always be relatively
straightforward. In fact, a well-designed experiment will sometimes almost analyze
itself! However, if you botch the pre-experimental planning and execute the experi-
mental design badly, it is unlikely that even the most complex and elegant statistics
can save the situation.
3. Recognize the difference between practical and statistical signicance. Just because
two experimental conditions produce mean responses that are statistically different,
there is no assurance that this difference is large enough to have any practical value.
For example, an engineer may determine that a modication to an automobile fuel
injection system may produce a true mean improvement in gasoline mileage of 
0.1 mi/gal and be able to determine that this is a statistically signicant result.
However, if the cost of the modication is $1000, the 0.1 mi/gal difference is proba-
bly too small to be of any practical value.
4. Experiments are usually iterative. Remember that in most situations it is unwise to
design too comprehensive an experiment at the start of a study. Successful design
requires the knowledge of important factors, the ranges over which these factors are
varied, the appropriate number of levels for each factor, and the proper methods and
units of measurement for each factor and response. Generally, we are not well
equipped to answer these questions at the beginning of the experiment, but we learn
the answers as we go along. This argues in favor of the iterative, or sequential,
approach discussed previously. Of course, there are situations where comprehensive
experiments are entirely appropriate, but as a general rule most experiments should be
iterative. Consequently, we usually should not invest more than about 25 percent of
the resources of experimentation (runs, budget, time, etc.) in the initial experiment.
Often these rst efforts are just learning experiences, and some resources must be
available to accomplish the nal objectives of the experiment.
1.7 Problems
23
1.7
Problems
1.1.
Suppose that you want to design an experiment to
study the proportion of unpopped kernels of popcorn.
Complete steps 1–3 of the guidelines for designing experi-
ments in Section 1.4. Are there any major sources of variation
that would be difcult to control?
1.2.
Suppose that you want to investigate the factors that
potentially affect cooking rice.
(a) What would you use as a response variable in this
experiment? How would you measure the response?
