the important factors that result in desirable values of the response. For
example, if a screening experiment on a chemical process results in the
identification of time and temperature as the two most important fac-
tors, the optimization experiment may have as its objective finding the
levels of time and temperature that maximize yield, or perhaps maxi-
mize yield while keeping some product property that is critical to the
customer within specifications. An optimization experiment is usually
a follow-up to a screening experiment. It would be very unusual for a
screening experiment to produce the optimal settings of the important
factors.
c. Conrmation. In a conrmation experiment, the experimenter is usually
trying to verify that the system operates or behaves in a manner that is
consistent with some theory or past experience.  For example, if theory
or experience indicates that a particular new material is equivalent to the
one currently in use and the new material is desirable (perhaps less
expensive, or easier to work with in some way), then a conrmation
experiment would be conducted to verify that substituting the new mate-
rial results in no change in product characteristics that impact its use.
Moving a new manufacturing process to full-scale production based on
results found during experimentation at a pilot plant or development site
is another situation that often results in conrmation experiments—that
is, are the same factors and settings that were determined during devel-
opment work appropriate for the full-scale process?
d. Discovery. In discovery experiments, the experimenters are usually trying
to determine what happens when we explore new materials, or new fac-
tors, or new ranges for factors. In the pharmaceutical industry, scientists
are constantly conducting discovery experiments to nd new materials or
combinations of materials that will be effective in treating disease.
e. Robustness. These experiments often address questions such as under
what conditions do the response variables of interest seriously degrade?
Or what conditions would lead to unacceptable variability in the response
variables? A variation of this is determining how we can set the factors in
the system that we can control to minimize the variability transmitted into
the response from factors that we cannot control very well. We will dis-
cuss some experiments of this type in Chapter 12.
Obviously, the specic questions to be addressed in the experiment relate
directly to the overall objectives. An important aspect of problem formulation is the
recognition that one large comprehensive experiment is unlikely to answer the key
questions satisfactorily. A single comprehensive experiment requires the experi-
menters to know the answers to a lot of questions, and if they are wrong, the results
will be disappointing. This leads to wasting time, materials, and other resources and
may result in never answering the original research questions satisfactorily. A
sequential approach employing a series of smaller experiments, each with a specific
objective, such as factor screening, is a better strategy.
2. Selection of the response variable.
In selecting the response variable, the exper-
imenter should be certain that this variable really provides useful information about
the process under study. Most often, the average or standard deviation (or both) of
the measured characteristic will be the response variable. Multiple responses are
not unusual. The experimenters must decide how each response will be measured,
and address issues such as how will any measurement system be calibrated and
1.4 Guidelines for Designing Experiments
15
