strength is of practical importance (or has engineering signiţüęcance in addition to statistical
signiţüęcance) then more development work and further experimentation will likely be
required.
The Use of P-Values in Hypothesis Testing. One way to report the results of
a hypothesis test is to state that the null hypothesis was or was not rejected at a specified
ţÇç-value or level of signi´Čücance. This is often called ´Čüxed signi´Čücance level testing. For
example, in the Portland cement mortar formulation above, we can say that H0 : ţÇâ1 ţÇâţÇâ2 was
rejected at the 0.05 level of signiţüęcance. This statement of conclusions is often inadequate
because it gives the decision maker no idea about whether the computed value of the test sta-
tistic was just barely in the rejection region or whether it was very far into this region.
Furthermore, stating the results this way imposes the predeţüęned level of signiţüęcance on other
users of the information. This approach may be unsatisfactory because some decision makers
might be uncomfortable with the risks implied by ţÇçţÇâ0.05.
To avoid these difţüęculties, the P-value approach has been adopted widely in practice.
The P-value is the probability that the test statistic will take on a value that is at least as
extreme as the observed value of the statistic when the null hypothesis H0 is true. Thus, a P-
value conveys much information about the weight of evidence against H0, and so a decision
maker can draw a conclusion at any speciţüęed level of signiţüęcance. More formally, we deţüęne
the P-value as the smallest level of signiţüęcance that would lead to rejection of the null
hypothesis H0.
It is customary to call the test statistic (and the data) signiţüęcant when the null hypoth-
esis H0 is rejected; therefore, we may think of the P-value as the smallest level ţÇçat which the
data are signiţüęcant. Once the P-value is known, the decision maker can determine how
signiţüęcant the data are without the data analyst formally imposing a preselected level of
signiţüęcance.
It is not always easy to compute the exact P-value for a test. However, most modern
computer programs for statistical analysis report P-values, and they can be obtained on
some handheld calculators. We will show how to approximate the P-value for the Portland
cement mortar experiment. Because ţÇët0ţÇëţÇâ2.20 ţÇőt0.025,18 ţÇâ2.101, we know that the P-
value is less than 0.05. From Appendix Table II, for a t distribution with 18 degrees of free-
dom, and tail area probability 0.01 we find t0.01,18 ţÇâ2.552. Now ţÇët0ţÇëţÇâ2.20 ţÇŐ2.552, so
because the alternative hypothesis is two sided, we know that the P-value must be between
0.05 and 2(0.01) ţÇâ0.02. Some handheld calculators have the capability to calculate P-values.
One such calculator is the HP-48. From this calculator, we obtain the P-value for the value
t0 ţÇâţÇÇ2.20 in the Portland cement mortar formulation experiment as P ţÇâ0.0411. Thus
the null hypothesis H0 : ţÇâ1 ţÇâţÇâ2 would be rejected at any level of significance ţÇçţÇő
0.0411.
Computer Solution. Many statistical software packages have capability for statisti-
cal hypothesis testing. The output from both the Minitab and the JMP two-sample t-test pro-
cedure applied to the Portland cement mortar formulation experiment is shown in Table 2.2.
Notice that the output includes some summary statistics about the two samples (the abbrevi-
ation ÔÇťSE meanÔÇŁ in the Minitab section of the table refers to the standard error of the mean,
) as well as some information about conţüędence intervals on the difference in the two
means (which we will discuss in the next section). The programs also test the hypothesis of
interest, allowing the analyst to specify the nature of the alternative hypothesis (ÔÇťnot ţÇâÔÇŁ in
the Minitab output implies H1 : ţÇâ1 ţÇÇţÇâ2).
The output includes the computed value of t0, the value of the test statistic t0 (JMP
reports a positive value of t0 because of how the sample means are subtracted in the numerator
s/ţÇůn
40
Chapter 2 ÔľáSimple Comparative Experiments
