of analysis depends directly on the design employed. Both topics will be addressed in this
book.
The three basic principles of experimental design are randomization, replication, and
blocking. Sometimes we add the factorial principle to these three. Randomization is the cor-
nerstone underlying the use of statistical methods in experimental design. By randomization
we mean that both the allocation of the experimental material and the order in which the indi-
vidual runs of the experiment are to be performed are randomly determined. Statistical meth-
ods require that the observations (or errors) be independently distributed random variables.
Randomization usually makes this assumption valid. By properly randomizing the experi-
ment, we also assist in “averaging out” the effects of extraneous factors that may be present.
For example, suppose that the specimens in the hardness experiment are of slightly different
thicknesses and that the effectiveness of the quenching medium may be affected by specimen
thickness. If all the specimens subjected to the oil quench are thicker than those subjected to
the saltwater quench, we may be introducing systematic bias into the experimental results.
This bias handicaps one of the quenching media and consequently invalidates our results.
Randomly assigning the specimens to the quenching media alleviates this problem.
Computer software programs are widely used to assist experimenters in selecting and
constructing experimental designs. These programs often present the runs in the experimental
design in random order. This random order is created by using a random number generator.
Even with such a computer program, it is still often necessary to assign units of experimental
material (such as the specimens in the hardness example mentioned above), operators, gauges
or measurement devices, and so forth for use in the experiment.
Sometimes experimenters encounter situations where randomization of some aspect of
the experiment is difcult. For example, in a chemical process, temperature may be a very
hard-to-change variable as we may want to change it less often than we change the levels of
other factors. In an experiment of this type, complete randomization would be difcult
because it would add time and cost. There are statistical design methods for dealing with
restrictions on randomization. Some of these approaches will be discussed in subsequent
chapters (see in particular Chapter 14).
By replication we mean an independent repeat run of each factor combination. In the
metallurgical experiment discussed in Section 1.1, replication would consist of treating a
specimen by oil quenching and treating a specimen by saltwater quenching. Thus, if ve
specimens are treated in each quenching medium, we say that ve replicates have been
obtained. Each of the 10 observations should be run in random order. Replication has two
important properties. First, it allows the experimenter to obtain an estimate of the experi-
mental error. This estimate of error becomes a basic unit of measurement for determining
whether observed differences in the data are really statistically different. Second, if the sam-
ple mean ( ) is used to estimate the true mean response for one of the factor levels in the
experiment, replication permits the experimenter to obtain a more precise estimate of this
parameter. For example; if 2 is the variance of an individual observation and there are 
n replicates, the variance of the sample mean is
The practical implication of this is that if we had n 1 replicates and observed 
y1 145 (oil quench) and y2 147 (saltwater quench), we would probably be unable to
make satisfactory inferences about the effect of the quenching medium—that is, the
observed difference could be the result of experimental error. The point is that without
replication we have no way of knowing why the two observations are different. On the
other hand, if n was reasonably large and the experimental error was sufficiently small and
if we observed sample averages  
, we would be reasonably safe in concluding that
y1 < y2
y
2
2
n
y
12
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
