underestimate the logistical and planning aspects of running a designed experiment
in a complex manufacturing or research and development environment.
Coleman and Montgomery (1993) suggest that prior to conducting the experi-
ment a few trial runs or pilot runs are often helpful. These runs provide information
about consistency of experimental material, a check on the measurement system, a
rough idea of experimental error, and a chance to practice the overall experimental
technique. This also provides an opportunity to revisit the decisions made in steps
1–4, if necessary.
6. Statistical analysis of the data. Statistical methods should be used to analyze the data
so that results and conclusions are objective rather than judgmental in nature. If the
experiment has been designed correctly and performed according to the design, the
statistical methods required are not elaborate. There are many excellent software
packages designed to assist in data analysis, and many of the programs used in step 4
to select the design provide a seamless, direct interface to the statistical analysis. Often
we nd that simple graphical methods play an important role in data analysis and
interpretation. Because many of the questions that the experimenter wants to answer
can be cast into an hypothesis-testing framework, hypothesis testing and condence
interval estimation procedures are very useful in analyzing data from a designed
experiment. It is also usually very helpful to present the results of many experiments
in terms of an empirical model, that is, an equation derived from the data that express
the relationship between the response and the important design factors. Residual
analysis and model adequacy checking are also important analysis techniques. We will
discuss these issues in detail later.
Remember that statistical methods cannot prove that a factor (or factors) has a
particular effect. They only provide guidelines as to the reliability and validity of
results. When properly applied, statistical methods do not allow anything to be proved
experimentally, but they do allow us to measure the likely error in a conclusion or to
attach a level of condence to a statement. The primary advantage of statistical meth-
ods is that they add objectivity to the decision-making process. Statistical techniques
coupled with good engineering or process knowledge and common sense will usually
lead to sound conclusions.
7. Conclusions and recommendations. Once the data have been analyzed, the experi-
menter must draw practical conclusions about the results and recommend a course of
action. Graphical methods are often useful in this stage, particularly in presenting the
results to others. Follow-up runs and conﬁrmation testing should also be performed
to validate the conclusions from the experiment.
Throughout this entire process, it is important to keep in mind that experimen-
tation is an important part of the learning process, where we tentatively formulate
hypotheses about a system, perform experiments to investigate these hypotheses,
and on the basis of the results formulate new hypotheses, and so on. This suggests
that experimentation is iterative. It is usually a major mistake to design a single,
large, comprehensive experiment at the start of a study. A successful experiment
requires knowledge of the important factors, the ranges over which these factors
should be varied, the appropriate number of levels to use, and the proper units of
measurement for these variables. Generally, we do not perfectly know the answers
to these questions, but we learn about them as we go along. As an experimental pro-
gram progresses, we often drop some input variables, add others, change the region
of exploration for some factors, or add new response variables. Consequently, we
usually experiment sequentially, and as a general rule, no more than about 25 percent
of the available resources should be invested in the rst experiment. This will ensure
20
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
