how this calibration will be maintained during the experiment. The gauge or meas-
urement system capability (or measurement error) is also an important factor. If
gauge capability is inadequate, only relatively large factor effects will be detected
by the experiment or perhaps additional replication will be required. In some situ-
ations where gauge capability is poor, the experimenter may decide to measure
each experimental unit several times and use the average of the repeated measure-
ments as the observed response. It is usually critically important to identify issues
related to defining the responses of interest and how they are to be measured before
conducting the experiment. Sometimes designed experiments are employed to
study and improve the performance of measurement systems. For an example, see
Chapter 13.
3. Choice of factors, levels, and range.
(As noted in Table 1.1, steps 2 and 3 are often
done simultaneously or in the reverse order.) When considering the factors that may
inuence the performance of a process or system, the experimenter usually discov-
ers that these factors can be classied as either potential design factors or nuisance
factors. The potential design factors are those factors that the experimenter may wish
to vary in the experiment. Often we nd that there are a lot of potential design fac-
tors, and some further classication of them is helpful. Some useful classications
are design factors, held-constant factors, and allowed-to-vary factors. The design
factors are the factors actually selected for study in the experiment. Held-constant
factors are variables that may exert some effect on the response, but for purposes of
the present experiment these factors are not of interest, so they will be held at a spe-
cic level. For example, in an etching experiment in the semiconductor industry,
there may be an effect that is unique to the specic plasma etch tool used in the
experiment. However, this factor would be very difcult to vary in an experiment, so
the experimenter may decide to perform all experimental runs on one particular (ide-
ally “typical”) etcher. Thus, this factor has been held constant. As an example of
allowed-to-vary factors, the experimental units or the “materials” to which the design
factors are applied are usually nonhomogeneous, yet we often ignore this unit-to-unit
variability and rely on randomization to balance out any material or experimental
unit effect. We often assume that the effects of held-constant factors and allowed-to-
vary factors are relatively small.
Nuisance factors, on the other hand, may have large effects that must be
accounted for, yet we may not be interested in them in the context of the present experi-
ment. Nuisance factors are often classied as controllable, uncontrollable, or noise
factors. A controllable nuisance factor is one whose levels may be set by the exper-
imenter. For example, the experimenter can select different batches of raw material
or different days of the week when conducting the experiment. The blocking princi-
ple, discussed in the previous section, is often useful in dealing with controllable nui-
sance factors. If a nuisance factor is uncontrollable in the experiment, but it can be
measured, an analysis procedure called the analysis of covariance can often be used
to compensate for its effect. For example, the relative humidity in the process envi-
ronment may affect process performance, and if the humidity cannot be controlled,
it probably can be measured and treated as a covariate. When a factor that varies nat-
urally and uncontrollably in the process can be controlled for purposes of an experi-
ment, we often call it a noise factor. In such situations, our objective is usually to nd
the settings of the controllable design factors that minimize the variability transmit-
ted from the noise factors. This is sometimes called a process robustness study or a
robust design problem. Blocking, analysis of covariance, and process robustness
studies are discussed later in the text.
16
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
