Models for the Data. We will nd it useful to describe the observations from an
experiment with a model. One way to write this model is
(3.1)
where yij is the ijth observation, i is the mean of the ith factor level or treatment, and ij is a
random error component that incorporates all other sources of variability in the experiment
including measurement, variability arising from uncontrolled factors, differences between the
experimental units (such as test material, etc.) to which the treatments are applied, and the
general background noise in the process (such as variability over time, effects of environmen-
tal variables, and so forth). It is convenient to think of the errors as having mean zero, so that
E(yij) i.
Equation 3.1 is called the means model. An alternative way to write a model for the
data is to dene
so that Equation 3.1 becomes
(3.2)
In this form of the model, is a parameter common to all treatments called the overall mean,
and i is a parameter unique to the ith treatment called the ith treatment effect. Equation 3.2
is usually called the effects model.
Both the means model and the effects model are linear statistical models; that is, the
response variable yij is a linear function of the model parameters. Although both forms of the
model are useful, the effects model is more widely encountered in the experimental design lit-
erature. It has some intuitive appeal in that is a constant and the treatment effects i repre-
sent deviations from this constant when the specic treatments are applied.
Equation 3.2 (or 3.1) is also called the one-way or single-factor analysis of variance
(ANOVA) model because only one factor is investigated. Furthermore, we will require that
the experiment be performed in random order so that the environment in which the treatments
are applied (often called the experimental units) is as uniform as possible. Thus, the exper-
imental design is a completely randomized design. Our objectives will be to test appropri-
ate hypotheses about the treatment means and to estimate them. For hypothesis testing, the
model errors are assumed to be normally and independently distributed random variables with
mean zero and variance 2. The variance 2 is assumed to be constant for all levels of the fac-
tor. This implies that the observations
and that the observations are mutually independent.
Fixed or Random Factor? The statistical model, Equation 3.2, describes two differ-
ent situations with respect to the treatment effects. First, the a treatments could have been
specically chosen by the experimenter. In this situation, we wish to test hypotheses about the
treatment means, and our conclusions will apply only to the factor levels considered in the
analysis. The conclusions cannot be extended to similar treatments that were not explicitly
considered. We may also wish to estimate the model parameters (, i, 2). This is called the
ﬁxed effects model. Alternatively, the a treatments could be a random sample from a larg-
er population of treatments. In this situation, we should like to be able to extend the conclu-
sions (which are based on the sample of treatments) to all treatments in the population,
yij N(i, 2)
yij i ij
i 1, 2, . . . , a
j 1, 2, . . . , n
i i, 
 i 1, 2, . . . , a
yij i ij
i 1, 2, . . . , a
j 1, 2, . . . , n
3.2 The Analysis of Variance
69
