that sufcient resources are available to perform conrmation runs and ultimately
accomplish the nal objective of the experiment.
Finally, it is important to recognize that all experiments are designed exper-
iments. The important issue is whether they are well designed or not. Good pre-
experimental planning will usually lead to a good, successful experiment. Failure
to do such planning usually leads to wasted time, money, and other resources and
often poor or disappointing results.
1.5
A Brief History of Statistical Design
There have been four eras in the modern development of statistical experimental design. The
agricultural era was led by the pioneering work of Sir Ronald A. Fisher in the 1920s and early
1930s. During that time, Fisher was responsible for statistics and data analysis at the
Rothamsted Agricultural Experimental Station near London, England. Fisher recognized that
aws in the way the experiment that generated the data had been performed often hampered
the analysis of data from systems (in this case, agricultural systems). By interacting with sci-
entists and researchers in many elds, he developed the insights that led to the three basic
principles of experimental design that we discussed in Section 1.3: randomization, replica-
tion, and blocking. Fisher systematically introduced statistical thinking and principles into
designing experimental investigations, including the factorial design concept and the analysis
of variance. His two books [the most recent editions are Fisher (1958, 1966)] had profound
inuence on the use of statistics, particularly in agricultural and related life sciences. For an
excellent biography of Fisher, see Box (1978).
Although applications of statistical design in industrial settings certainly began in the
1930s, the second, or industrial, era was catalyzed by the development of response surface
methodology (RSM) by Box and Wilson (1951). They recognized and exploited the fact that
many industrial experiments are fundamentally different from their agricultural counterparts
in two ways: (1) the response variable can usually be observed (nearly) immediately, and 
(2) the experimenter can quickly learn crucial information from a small group of runs that can
be used to plan the next experiment. Box (1999) calls these two features of industrial exper-
iments immediacy and sequentiality. Over the next 30 years, RSM and other design
techniques spread throughout the chemical and the process industries, mostly in research and
development work. George Box was the intellectual leader of this movement. However, the
application of statistical design at the plant or manufacturing process level was still not
extremely widespread. Some of the reasons for this include an inadequate training in basic
statistical concepts and methods for engineers and other process specialists and the lack of
computing resources and user-friendly statistical software to support the application of statis-
tically designed experiments.
It was during this second or industrial era that work on optimal design of experi-
ments began. Kiefer (1959, 1961) and Kiefer and Wolfowitz (1959) proposed a formal
approach to selecting a design based on specific objective optimality criteria. Their initial
approach was to select a design that would result in the model parameters being estimat-
ed with the best possible precision. This approach did not find much application because
of the lack of computer tools for its implementation. However, there have been great
advances in both algorithms for generating optimal designs and computing capability over
the last 25 years. Optimal designs have great application and are discussed at several
places in the book.
The increasing interest of Western industry in quality improvement that began in the
late 1970s ushered in the third era of statistical design. The work of Genichi Taguchi [Taguchi
1.5 A Brief History of Statistical Design
21
