curves also assume that the sample sizes from the two populations are equal and that the sam-
ple size shown on the horizontal scale (say n) is the total sample size, so that the sample size
in each population is n/2.  Also notice that the difference in means is expressed as a ratio to
the common standard deviation; that is
From examining these curves we observe the following:
1. The greater the difference in means 
, the higher the power (smaller type
II error probability).  That is, for a specied sample size and signicance level ,
the test will detect large differences in means more easily than small ones.
2. As the sample size get larger, the power of the test gets larger (the type II error
probability gets smaller) for a given difference in means and signicance level .
That is, to detect a specied difference in means we may make the test more pow-
erful by increasing the sample size.
Operating curves and power curves are often helpful in selecting a sample size to use in an
experiment.  For example, consider the Portland cement mortar problem discussed previously.
Suppose that a difference in mean strength of 0.5 kgf/cm2 has practical impact on the use of
the mortar, so if the difference in means is at least this large, we would like to detect it with a
high probability. Thus, because 
kgf/cm2 is the “critical” difference in means
that we wish to detect, we nd that the power curve parameter would be 
.
Unfortunately,
involves the unknown standard deviation . However, suppose on the basis of
past experience we think that it is very unlikely that the standard deviation will exceed 
0.25 kgf/cm2. Then substituting 
kgf/cm2 into the expression for results in 
. If
we wish to reject the null hypothesis when the difference in means 
with prob-
ability at least 0.95 (power = 0.95) with 
, then referring to Figure 2.13 we nd that the
required sample size on the horizontal axis is 16, approximately.  This is the total sample size,
so the sample size in each population should be 
In our example, the experimenter actually used a sample size of 10. The experimenter could
have elected to increase the sample size slightly to guard against the possibility that the prior
estimate of the common standard deviation was too conservative and was likely to be some-
what larger than 0.25.
Operating characteristic curves often play an important role in the choice of sample size
in experimental design problems. Their use in this respect is discussed in subsequent chap-
ters. For a discussion of the uses of operating characteristic curves for other simple compar-
ative experiments similar to the two-sample t-test, see Montgomery and Runger (2011).
Many statistics software packages can also assist the experimenter in performing power
and sample size calculations. The following boxed display illustrates several computations for
the Portland cement mortar problem from the power and sample size routine for the two-sample
t test in Minitab. The rst section of output repeats the analysis performed with the OC
curves; nd the sample size necessary for detecting the critical difference in means of
0.5 kgf/cm2, assuming that the standard deviation of strength is 0.25 kgf/cm2. Notice that the
answer obtained from Minitab, n1 n2 8, is identical to the value obtained from the OC
curve analysis. The second section of the output computes the power for the case where the
critical difference in means is much smaller; only 0.25 kgf/cm2. The power has dropped con-
siderably, from over 0.95 to 0.562. The nal section determines the sample sizes that would
be necessary to detect an actual difference in means of 0.25 kgf/cm2 with a power of at least
0.9. The required sample size turns out to be considerably larger, n1 n2 23.
n 16/2 8.
0.05
1 2 0.5
2

0.25


0.5/
1 2 0.5
1 2

1 2

46
Chapter 2 ■Simple Comparative Experiments
