commercialization and product realization activities, which consist of new product design
and formulation, manufacturing process development, and process improvement. The objec-
tive in many cases may be to develop a robust process, that is, a process affected minimally
by external sources of variability. There are also many applications of designed experiments
in a nonmanufacturing or non-product-development setting, such as marketing, service oper-
ations, and general business operations.
As an example of an experiment, suppose that a metallurgical engineer is interested in
studying the effect of two different hardening processes, oil quenching and saltwater
quenching, on an aluminum alloy. Here the objective of the experimenter (the engineer) is
to determine which quenching solution produces the maximum hardness for this particular
alloy. The engineer decides to subject a number of alloy specimens or test coupons to each
quenching medium and measure the hardness of the specimens after quenching. The aver-
age hardness of the specimens treated in each quenching solution will be used to determine
which solution is best.
As we consider this simple experiment, a number of important questions come to mind:
1. Are these two solutions the only quenching media of potential interest?
2. Are there any other factors that might affect hardness that should be investigated or
controlled in this experiment (such as, the temperature of the quenching media)?
3. How many coupons of alloy should be tested in each quenching solution?
4. How should the test coupons be assigned to the quenching solutions, and in what
order should the data be collected?
5. What method of data analysis should be used?
6. What difference in average observed hardness between the two quenching media
will be considered important?
All of these questions, and perhaps many others, will have to be answered satisfactorily
before the experiment is performed.
Experimentation is a vital part of the scientiﬁc (or engineering) method. Now there are
certainly situations where the scientic phenomena are so well understood that useful results
including mathematical models can be developed directly by applying these well-understood
principles. The models of such phenomena that follow directly from the physical mechanism
are usually called mechanistic models. A simple example is the familiar equation for current
ow in an electrical circuit, Ohm’s law, E IR. However, most problems in science and engi-
neering require observation of the system at work and experimentation to elucidate infor-
mation about why and how it works. Well-designed experiments can often lead to a model of
system performance; such experimentally determined models are called empirical models.
Throughout this book, we will present techniques for turning the results of a designed exper-
iment into an empirical model of the system under study. These empirical models can be
manipulated by a scientist or an engineer just as a mechanistic model can.
A well-designed experiment is important because the results and conclusions that can
be drawn from the experiment depend to a large extent on the manner in which the data were
collected. To illustrate this point, suppose that the metallurgical engineer in the above exper-
iment used specimens from one heat in the oil quench and specimens from a second heat in
the saltwater quench. Now, when the mean hardness is compared, the engineer is unable to
say how much of the observed difference is the result of the quenching media and how much
is the result of inherent differences between the heats.1 Thus, the method of data collection
has adversely affected the conclusions that can be drawn from the experiment.
2
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
1 A specialist in experimental design would say that the effect of quenching media and heat were confounded; that is, the effects of
these two factors cannot be separated.
