82
Chapter 3 ■Experiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
variance (and related procedures such as multiple comparisons) is robust to the normality
assumption. Departures from normality usually cause both the true signicance level and the
power to differ slightly from the advertised values, with the power generally being lower. The ran-
dom effects model that we will discuss in Section 3.9 and Chapter 13 is more severely affected by
nonnormality.
A very common defect that often shows up on normal probability plots is one residual
that is very much larger than any of the others. Such a residual is often called an outlier. The
presence of one or more outliers can seriously distort the analysis of variance, so when a
potential outlier is located, careful investigation is called for. Frequently, the cause of the
outlier is a mistake in calculations or a data coding or copying error. If this is not the cause,
the experimental circumstances surrounding this run must be carefully studied. If the outly-
ing response is a particularly desirable value (high strength, low cost, etc.), the outlier may
be more informative than the rest of the data. We should be careful not to reject or discard
an outlying observation unless we have reasonably nonstatistical grounds for doing so. At
worst, you may end up with two analyses; one with the outlier and one without.
Several formal statistical procedures may be used for detecting outliers [e.g., see Stefansky
(1972), John and Prescott (1975), and Barnett and Lewis (1994)]. Some statistical software pack-
ages report the results of a statistical test for normality (such as the Anderson-Darling test) on the
normal probability plot of residuals. This should be viewed with caution as those tests usually
assume that the data to which they are applied are independent and residuals are not independent.
A rough check for outliers may be made by examining the standardized residuals
(3.18)
If the errors ij are N(0, 2), the standardized residuals should be approximately normal with mean
zero and unit variance. Thus, about 68 percent of the standardized residuals should fall within the
limits 1, about 95 percent of them should fall within 2, and virtually all of them should fall
within 3. A residual bigger than 3 or 4 standard deviations from zero is a potential outlier.
For the tensile strength data of Example 3.1, the normal probability plot gives no indi-
cation of outliers. Furthermore, the largest standardized residual is
which should cause no concern.
3.4.2
Plot of Residuals in Time Sequence
Plotting the residuals in time order of data collection is helpful in detecting strong correlation
between the residuals. A tendency to have runs of positive and negative residuals indicates pos-
itive correlation. This would imply that the independence assumption on the errors has been
violated. This is a potentially serious problem and one that is difcult to correct, so it is impor-
tant to prevent the problem if possible when the data are collected. Proper randomization of the
experiment is an important step in obtaining independence.
Sometimes the skill of the experimenter (or the subjects) may change as the experiment
progresses, or the process being studied may “drift” or become more erratic. This will often result
in a change in the error variance over time. This condition often leads to a plot of residuals ver-
sus time that exhibits more spread at one end than at the other. Nonconstant variance is a poten-
tially serious problem. We will have more to say on the subject in Sections 3.4.3 and 3.4.4.
Table 3.6 displays the residuals and the time sequence of data collection for the tensile
strength data. A plot of these residuals versus run order or time is shown in Figure 3.5. There
is no reason to suspect any violation of the independence or constant variance assumptions.
d1 
e1
MSE

25.6
333.70
25.6
18.27 1.40
dij 
eij
MSE
