OFAT experiments are run frequently in practice. (Some individuals actually think that this
strategy is related to the scientic method or that it is a “sound” engineering principle.) One-
factor-at-a-time experiments are always less efcient than other methods based on a statistical
approach to design. We will discuss this in more detail in Chapter 5.
The correct approach to dealing with several factors is to conduct a factorial experi-
ment. This is an experimental strategy in which factors are varied together, instead of one
at a time. The factorial experimental design concept is extremely important, and several
chapters in this book are devoted to presenting basic factorial experiments and a number of
useful variations and special cases.
To illustrate how a factorial experiment is conducted, consider the golf experiment and
suppose that only two factors, type of driver and type of ball, are of interest. Figure 1.4 shows
a two-factor factorial experiment for studying the joint effects of these two factors on my golf
score. Notice that this factorial experiment has both factors at two levels and that all possible
combinations of the two factors across their levels are used in the design. Geometrically, the
four runs form the corners of a square. This particular type of factorial experiment is called a
22 factorial design (two factors, each at two levels). Because I can reasonably expect to play
eight rounds of golf to investigate these factors, a reasonable plan would be to play two
rounds of golf at each combination of factor levels shown in Figure 1.4. An experimental
designer would say that we have replicated the design twice. This experimental design would
enable the experimenter to investigate the individual effects of each factor (or the main
effects) and to determine whether the factors interact.
Figure 1.5a shows the results of performing the factorial experiment in Figure 1.4. The
scores from each round of golf played at the four test combinations are shown at the corners
of the square. Notice that there are four rounds of golf that provide information about using
the regular-sized driver and four rounds that provide information about using the oversized
driver. By nding the average difference in the scores on the right- and left-hand sides of the
square (as in Figure 1.5b), we have a measure of the effect of switching from the oversized
driver to the regular-sized driver, or
That is, on average, switching from the oversized to the regular-sized driver increases the
score by 3.25 strokes per round. Similarly, the average difference in the four scores at the top
3.25
 Driver effect 92 94 93 91
4
88 91 88 90
4
1.1 Strategy of Experimentation
5
■F I G U R E 1 . 3
Interaction between
type of driver and type of beverage for
the golf experiment
Beverage type
Score
W
B
Oversized
driver
Regular-sized
driver
Type of driver
Type of ball
O
B
T
R
■F I G U R E 1 . 4
A two-factor
factorial experiment involving type
of driver and type of ball
