4.1 The Randomized Complete Block Design
151
blocks) has occurred. Similarly, interactions between treatments and blocks can occur when
the response is measured on the wrong scale. Thus, a relationship that is multiplicative in the
original units, say
is linear or additive in a log scale since, for example,
or
Although this type of interaction can be eliminated by a transformation, not all interactions
are so easily treated. For example, transformations do not eliminate the formulation–batch
interaction discussed previously. Residual analysis and other diagnostic checking procedures
can be helpful in detecting nonadditivity.
If interaction is present, it can seriously affect and possibly invalidate the analysis of
variance. In general, the presence of interaction inates the error mean square and may
adversely affect the comparison of treatment means. In situations where both factors, as well
as their possible interaction, are of interest, factorial designs must be used. These designs are
discussed extensively in Chapters 5 through 9.
Random Treatments and Blocks. Our presentation of the randomized complete
block design thus far has focused on the case when both the treatments and blocks were con-
sidered as xed factors. There are many situations where either treatments or blocks (or both)
are random factors. It is very common to nd that the blocks are random. This is usually what
the experimenter would like to do, because we would like for the conclusions from the exper-
iment to be valid across the population of blocks that the ones selected for the experiments
were sampled from. First, we consider the case where the treatments are xed and the blocks
are random. Equation 4.1 is still the appropriate statistical model, but now the block effects
are random, that is, we assume that the j , j  1, 2,..., b are NID(0, 2
) random variables.
This is a special case of a mixed model (because it contains both xed and random factors).
In Chapters 13 and 14 we will discuss mixed models in more detail and provide several exam-
ples of situations where they occur. Our discussion here is limited to the RCBD.  
Assuming that the RCBD model Equation 4.1 is appropriate, if the blocks are random
and the treatments are xed we can show that:
(4.14)
Thus, the variance of the observations is constant, the covariance between any two observa-
tions in different blocks is zero, but the covariance between two observations from the same
block is 
. The expected mean squares from the usual ANOVA partitioning of the total sum
of squares are 
(4.15)
E(MSE) 2
E(MSBlocks) 2 a2

E(MSTreatments) 2 
b
a
i1
2
i
a 1
2

Cov(yij, yij) 2
i Z i
Cov(yij, yij) 0,   j Z j
V(yij) 2
2
E(yij) i,
i 1, 2,..., a
E(y*ij ) * *i *j
ln E(yij) ln ln i ln j
E(yij) ij
