3.7 Determining Sample Size
105
Figure 3.14 is the output from JMP for the plasma etch experiment in Example 3.1.
The output information is very similar to that from Design-Expert and Minitab. The plots
of actual observations versus the predicted values and residuals versus the predicted values
are default output. There is an option in JMP to provide the Fisher LSD procedure or
TukeyέΑβs method to compare all pairs of means.
3.7
Determining Sample Size
In any experimental design problem, a critical decision is the choice of sample sizeέΑΦthat is,
determining the number of replicates to run. Generally, if the experimenter is interested 
in detecting small effects, more replicates are required than if the experimenter is interested in
detecting large effects. In this section, we discuss several approaches to determining sample
size. Although our discussion focuses on a single-factor design, most of the methods can be
used in more complex experimental situations.
3.7.1
Operating Characteristic Curves
Recall that an operating characteristic (OC) curve is a plot of the type II error probability
of a statistical test for a particular sample size versus a parameter that reΌΒςects the extent to
which the null hypothesis is false. These curves can be used to guide the experimenter in
selecting the number of replicates so that the design will be sensitive to important potential
differences in the treatments.
We consider the probability of type II error of the ΌΒσxed effects model for the case of
equal sample sizes per treatment, say
(3.43)
To evaluate the probability statement in Equation 3.43, we need to know the distribution of
the test statistic F0 if the null hypothesis is false. It can be shown that, if H0 is false, the statistic
F0 ΌΑΔMSTreatments/MSE is distributed as a noncentral F random variable with a ΌΑΑ1 and N ΌΑΑa
degrees of freedom and the noncentrality parameter ΌΑΚ. If ΌΑΚΌΑΔ0, the noncentral F distribution
becomes the usual (central) F distribution.
Operating characteristic curves given in Chart V of the Appendix are used to evaluate
the probability statement in Equation 3.43. These curves plot the probability of type II error
(ΌΑΒ) against a parameter ΌΑΠ, where
(3.44)
The quantity ΌΑΠ2 is related to the noncentrality parameter ΌΑΚ. Curves are available for ΌΑΘΌΑΔ0.05
and ΌΑΘΌΑΔ0.01 and a range of degrees of freedom for numerator and denominator.
In using the OC curves, the experimenter must specify the parameter ΌΑΠand the value of
ΌΑΑ2. This is often difΌΒσcult to do in practice. One way to determine ΌΑΠis to choose the actual val-
ues of the treatment means for which we would like to reject the null hypothesis with high
probability. Thus, if ΌΑΔ1, ΌΑΔ2, . . . , ΌΑΔa are the speciΌΒσed treatment means, we ΌΒσnd the ΌΑΞi in Equation
3.48 as ΌΑΞi ΌΑΔΌΑΔi ΌΑΑ
, where 
ΌΑΔ(1/a)
ΌΑΔi is the average of the individual treatment means.
The estimate of ΌΑΑ2 may be available from prior experience, a previous experiment or a prelim-
inary test (as suggested in Chapter 1), or a judgment estimate. When we are uncertain about
the value of ΌΑΑ2, sample sizes could be determined for a range of likely values of ΌΑΑ2 to study the
effect of this parameter on the required sample size before a ΌΒσnal choice is made.
"a
iΌΑΔ1
ΌΑΔ
ΌΑΔ
ΌΑΠ2 ΌΑΔ
n ΌΑΓ
a
iΌΑΔ1
ΌΑΞ2
i
aΌΑΑ2
ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΑP{F0 # FΌΑΘ,aΌΑΑ1,NΌΑΑaΌΑΚH0 is false}
ΌΑΒΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΑP{Reject H0ΌΑΚH0 is false}
