So, at 95 percent condence the mean strength of the fabric produced by the looms in
this facility is between 92.78 and 98.10. This is a relatively wide condence interval because
a small number of looms were sampled and there is a large difference between looms as
reected by the large portion of total variability that is accounted for by the differences
between looms.
Maximum Likelihood Estimation of the Variance Components. Earlier in this
section we presented the  analysis of variance method of variance component estimation.
This method is relatively straightforward to apply and makes use of familiar quantities—
the mean squares in the analysis of variance table. However, the method has some disad-
vantages. As we pointed out previously, it is a method of moments estimator, a technique
that mathematical statisticians generally do not prefer to use for parameter estimation
because it often results in parameter estimates that do not have good statistical properties.
One obvious problem is that it does not always lead to an easy way to construct confidence
intervals on the variance components of interest. For example, in the single-factor random
model there is not a simple way to construct confidence intervals on 
, which is certainly
a parameter of primary interest to the experimenter. The preferred parameter estimation
technique is called the method of maximum likelihood. The implementation of this
method can be somewhat involved, particularly for an experimental design model, but it has
been incorporated in some modern computer software packages that support designed
experiments, including JMP.
A complete presentation of the method of maximum likelihood is beyond the scope of
this book, but the general idea can be illustrated very easily. Suppose that x is a random vari-
able with probability distribution f(x, ), where is an unknown parameter. Let x1, x2, . . . , xn
be a random sample of n observations. The joint probability distribution of the sample is
. The likelihood function is just this joint probability distribution with the sample
observations consider xed and the parameter 
unknown. Note that the likelihood function,
say
is now a function of only the unknown parameter . The maximum likelihood estimator of is
the value of 
that maximizes the likelihood function L(x1, x2, ..., xn; ). To illustrate how this
applies to an experimental design model with random effects, let y be the an
1 vector of obser-
vations for a single-factor random effects model with a treatments and n replicates and let 
be
the an
an covariance matrix of the observations. Refer to Section 3.9.1 where we developed
this covariance matrix for the special case where 
and 
. The likelihood function is 
where
an is the total number of observations, jN is an 
vector of 1s, and 
is the
overall mean in the model. The maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters 
and
are the values of these quantities that maximize the likelihood function.
Maximum likelihood estimators (MLEs) have some very useful properties. For large sam-
ples, they are unbiased, and they have a normal distribution. Furthermore, the inverse of the matrix
of second derivatives of the likelihood function (multiplied by 1) is the covariance matrix of the
MLEs. This makes it relatively easy to obtain approximate condence intervals on the MLEs.
The standard variant of maximum likelihood estimation that is used for estimating vari-
ance components is known as the residual maximum likelihood (REML) method. It is pop-
ular because it produces unbiased estimators and like all MLEs, it is easy to nd CIs. The basic
2
, 2
,

N 1
N 
L(x11, x12,..., xa,n; , 2
, 2) 
1
(2)N/21/2 exp1
2 (y jN)1(y jN)
n 2
a 3







L(x1, x2,..., xn; ) 
n
i1
f (xi, )


n
i1
f (xi, )


2

3.9 The Random Effects Model
123
