3.5
Practical Interpretation of Results
After conducting the experiment, performing the statistical analysis, and investigating the
underlying assumptions, the experimenter is ready to draw practical conclusions about the
problem he or she is studying. Often this is relatively easy, and certainly in the simple exper-
iments we have considered so far, this might be done somewhat informally, perhaps by
inspection of graphical displays such as the box plots and scatter diagram in Figures 3.1 and
3.2. However, in some cases, more formal techniques need to be applied. We will present
some of these techniques in this section.
3.5.1
A Regression Model
The factors involved in an experiment can be either quantitative or qualitative. A quantitative
factor is one whose levels can be associated with points on a numerical scale, such as tempera-
ture, pressure, or time. Qualitative factors, on the other hand, are factors for which the levels
cannot be arranged in order of magnitude. Operators, batches of raw material, and shifts are typ-
ical qualitative factors because there is no reason to rank them in any particular numerical order.
Insofar as the initial design and analysis of the experiment are concerned, both types of
factors are treated identically. The experimenter is interested in determining the differences,
if any, between the levels of the factors. In fact, the analysis of variance treat the design fac-
tor as if it were qualitative or categorical. If the factor is really qualitative, such as operators,
it is meaningless to consider the response for a subsequent run at an intermediate level of the
factor. However, with a quantitative factor such as time, the experimenter is usually interest-
ed in the entire range of values used, particularly the response from a subsequent run at an
intermediate factor level. That is, if the levels 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0 hours are used in the experi-
ment, we may wish to predict the response at 2.5 hours. Thus, the experimenter is frequently
interested in developing an interpolation equation for the response variable in the experiment.
This equation is an empirical model of the process that has been studied.
The general approach to tting empirical models is called regression analysis, which
is discussed extensively in Chapter 10. See also the supplemental text material for this
chapter. This section briey illustrates the technique using the etch rate data of Example 3.1.
Figure 3.10 presents scatter diagrams of etch rate y versus the power x for the experi-
ment in Example 3.1. From examining the scatter diagram, it is clear that there is a strong
relationship between etch rate and power. As a rst approximation, we could try tting a lin-
ear model to the data, say
where 0 and 1 are unknown parameters to be estimated and is a random error term. The
method often used to estimate the parameters in a model such as this is the method of least
squares. This consists of choosing estimates of the ’s such that the sum of the squares of the
errors (the ’s) is minimized. The least squares t in our example is
(If you are unfamiliar with regression methods, see Chapter 10 and the supplemental text
material for this chapter.)
This linear model is shown in Figure 3.10a. It does not appear to be very satisfactory at
the higher power settings. Perhaps an improvement can be obtained by adding a quadratic
term in x. The resulting quadratic model t is
yˆ 1147.77 8.2555 x 0.028375 x2
yˆ 137.62 2.527x
y 0 1x 
3.5 Practical Interpretation of Results
89
