The concept of orthogonal pairs of Latin squares forming a Graeco-Latin square can be
extended somewhat. A p p hypersquare is a design in which three or more orthogonal p p
Latin squares are superimposed. In general, up to p 1 factors could be studied if a complete set
of p 1 orthogonal Latin squares is available. Such a design would utilize all (p 1)(p 1) 
p2 1 degrees of freedom, so an independent estimate of the error variance is necessary. Of
course, there must be no interactions between the factors when using hypersquares.
4.4
Balanced Incomplete Block Designs
In certain experiments using randomized block designs, we may not be able to run all the treat-
ment combinations in each block. Situations like this usually occur because of shortages of exper-
imental apparatus or facilities or the physical size of the block. For example, in the vascular graft
experiment (Example 4.1), suppose that each batch of material is only large enough to accommo-
date testing three extrusion pressures. Therefore, each pressure cannot be tested in each batch. For
this type of problem it is possible to use randomized block designs in which every treatment is
not present in every block. These designs are known as randomized incomplete block designs.
When all treatment comparisons are equally important, the treatment combinations
used in each block should be selected in a balanced manner, so that any pair of treatments
occur together the same number of times as any other pair. Thus, a balanced incomplete
block design (BIBD) is an incomplete block design in which any two treatments appear
together an equal number of times. Suppose that there are a treatments and that each block
can hold exactly k (k a) treatments. A balanced incomplete block design may be construct-
ed by taking 
blocks and assigning a different combination of treatments to each block.
Frequently, however, balance can be obtained with fewer than 
blocks. Tables of BIBDs are
given in Fisher and Yates (1953), Davies (1956), and Cochran and Cox (1957).
As an example, suppose that a chemical engineer thinks that the time of reaction for a chem-
ical process is a function of the type of catalyst employed. Four catalysts are currently being inves-
tigated. The experimental procedure consists of selecting a batch of raw material, loading the pilot
plant, applying each catalyst in a separate run of the pilot plant, and observing the reaction time.
Because variations in the batches of raw material may affect the performance of the catalysts, the
engineer decides to use batches of raw material as blocks. However, each batch is only large enough
to permit three catalysts to be run. Therefore, a randomized incomplete block design must be used.
The balanced incomplete block design for this experiment, along with the observations recorded,
is shown in Table 4.22. The order in which the catalysts are run in each block is randomized.
4.4.1
Statistical Analysis of the BIBD
As usual, we assume that there are a treatments and b blocks. In addition, we assume that each
block contains k treatments, that each treatment occurs r times in the design (or is replicated
(a
k)
(a
k)
168
Chapter 4 ■Randomized Blocks, Latin Squares, and Related Designs
■T A B L E 4 . 2 2
Balanced Incomplete Block Design for Catalyst Experiment
Treatment
Block (Batch of Raw Material)
(Catalyst)
1
2
3
4
yi.
1
73
74
—
71
218
2
—
75
67
72
214
3
73
75
68
—
216
4
75
—
72
75
222
y.j
221
224
207
218
870 y.
