139
C H A P T E R 4
R a n d o m i z e d B l o c k s ,
L a t i n S q u a r e s , a n d
R e l a t e d D e s i g n s
4.1
The Randomized Complete Block Design
In any experiment, variability arising from a nuisance factor can affect the results. Generally,
we dene a nuisance factor as a design factor that probably has an effect on the response,
but we are not interested in that effect. Sometimes a nuisance factor is unknown and uncon-
trolled; that is, we don’t know that the factor exists, and it may even be changing levels while
we are conducting the experiment. Randomization is the design technique used to guard
against such a “lurking” nuisance factor. In other cases, the nuisance factor is known but
uncontrollable. If we can at least observe the value that the nuisance factor takes on at each
run of the experiment, we can compensate for it in the statistical analysis by using the analy-
sis of covariance, a technique we will discuss in Chapter 14. When the nuisance source of
variability is known and controllable, a design technique called blocking can be used to sys-
tematically eliminate its effect on the statistical comparisons among treatments. Blocking is
an extremely important design technique used extensively in industrial experimentation and
is the subject of this chapter.
To illustrate the general idea, reconsider the hardness testing experiment rst described in
Section 2.5.1. Suppose now that we wish to determine whether or not four different tips produce
different readings on a hardness testing machine. An experiment such as this might be part of a
CHAPTER OUTLINE
4.1 THE RANDOMIZED COMPLETE BLOCK DESIGN
4.1.1 Statistical Analysis of the RCBD
4.1.2 Model Adequacy Checking
4.1.3 Some Other Aspects of the Randomized Complete
Block Design
4.1.4 Estimating Model Parameters and the General
Regression Signicance Test
4.2 THE LATIN SQUARE DESIGN
4.3 THE GRAECO-LATIN SQUARE DESIGN
The supplemental material is on the textbook website www.wiley.com/college/montgomery.
4.4 BALANCED INCOMPLETE BLOCK DESIGNS
4.4.1 Statistical Analysis of the BIBD
4.4.2 Least Squares Estimation of the Parameters
4.4.3 Recovery of Interblock Information in the BIBD
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL FOR CHAPTER 4
S4.1 Relative Efciency of the RCBD
S4.2 Partially Balanced Incomplete Block Designs
S4.3 Youden Squares
S4.4 Lattice Designs
