116
Chapter 3 έΨιExperiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
greater pot noise or greater cell voltage standard deviation than the other algorithms. There
does not seem to be much difference between algorithms 1, 2, and 4.
3.9
The Random Effects Model
3.9.1
A Single Random Factor
An experimenter is frequently interested in a factor that has a large number of possible levels.
If the experimenter randomly selects a of these levels from the population of factor levels, then
we say that the factor is random. Because the levels of the factor actually used in the experi-
ment were chosen randomly, inferences are made about the entire population of factor levels.
We assume that the population of factor levels is either of inΌΒσnite size or is large enough to be
considered inΌΒσnite. Situations in which the population of factor levels is small enough to employ
a ΌΒσnite population approach are not encountered frequently. Refer to Bennett and Franklin
(1954) and Searle and Fawcett (1970) for a discussion of the ΌΒσnite population case.
The linear statistical model is
(3.47)
where both the treatment effects ΌΑΞi and ΌΑΗij are random variables. We will assume that the treat-
ment effects ΌΑΞi are NID (0,
) random variables1 and that the errors are NID (0, ΌΑΑ2), random
variables, and that the ΌΑΞi and 
are independent. Because ΌΑΞi is independent of ΌΑΗij, the variance
of any observation is
The variances 
and ΌΑΑ2 are called variance components, and the model (Equation 3.47) is
called the components of variance or random effects model.The observations in the random
effects model are normally distributed because they are linear combinations of the two normally
and independently distributed random variables 
and 
. However, unlike the ΌΒσxed effects
case in which all of the observations yij are independent, in the random model the observations
yij are only independent if they come from different factor levels. SpeciΌΒσcally, we can show that
the covariance of any two observations is
Note that the observations within a speciΌΒσc factor level all have the same covariance, because
before the experiment is conducted, we expect the observations at that factor level to be sim-
ilar because they all have the same random component. Once the experiment has been con-
ducted, we can assume that all observations can be assumed to be independent, because the
parameter 
has been determined and the observations in that treatment differ only because
of random error.
We can express the covariance structure of the observations in the single-factor random
effects model through the covariance matrix of the observations. To illustrate, suppose that
we have 
treatments and 
replicates. There are 
observations, which we can
write as a vector 
N ΌΑΔ6
n ΌΑΔ2
a ΌΑΔ3
ΌΑΞi
CovΌΑΔyij, yiΌΑΧjΌΑΧΌΑΕΌΑΔ0  i Z iΌΑΧ
CovΌΑΔyij, yijΌΑΧΌΑΕΌΑΔΌΑΑ2
ΌΑΞ  j Z jΌΑΧ
ΌΑΓij
ΌΑΞi
ΌΑΑ2
ΌΑΞ
V(yij) ΌΑΔΌΑΑ2
ΌΑΞΌΑΕΌΑΑ2
ΌΑΗij
ΌΑΑ2
ΌΑΞ
yij ΌΑΔΌΑΔΌΑΕΌΑΞi ΌΑΕΌΑΗij  ΌΑΑ
i ΌΑΔ1, 2, . . . , a
j ΌΑΔ1, 2, . . . , n
1 The as assumption that the [ΌΑΞi] are independent random variables implies that the usual assumption of ΌΑΚa
iΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΞi ΌΑΔ 0 from the ΌΒσxed
effects model does not apply to the random effects model.
