that SSTreatments/2, SSBlocks/2, and SSE/2 are independently distributed chi-square random vari-
ables. Each sum of squares divided by its degrees of freedom is a mean square. The expected
value of the mean squares, if treatments and blocks are xed, can be shown to be
Therefore, to test the equality of treatment means, we would use the test statistic
which is distributed as Fa1,(a1)(b1) if the null hypothesis is true. The critical region is the
upper tail of the F distribution, and we would reject H0 if F0 F,a1,(a1)(b1). A P-value
approach can also be used.
We may also be interested in comparing block means because, if these means do not
differ greatly, blocking may not be necessary in future experiments. From the expected mean
squares, it seems that the hypothesis H0:j  0 may be tested by comparing the statistic 
F0 MSBlocks/MSE to F,b1,(a1)(b1). However, recall that randomization has been applied
only to treatments within blocks; that is, the blocks represent a restriction on randomiza-
tion. What effect does this have on the statistic F0 MSBlocks/MSE? Some differences in treat-
ment of this question exist. For example, Box, Hunter, and Hunter (2005) point out that the
usual analysis of variance F test can be justied on the basis of randomization only,2 without
direct use of the normality assumption. They further observe that the test to compare block
means cannot appeal to such a justication because of the randomization restriction; but if the
errors are NID(0, 2), the statistic F0 MSBlocks/MSE can be used to compare block means.
On the other hand, Anderson and McLean (1974) argue that the randomization restriction pre-
vents this statistic from being a meaningful test for comparing block means and that this 
F ratio really is a test for the equality of the block means plus the randomization restriction
[which they call a restriction error; see Anderson and McLean (1974) for further details].
In practice, then, what do we do? Because the normality assumption is often question-
able, to view F0 MSBlocks/MSE as an exact F test on the equality of block means is not a good
general practice. For that reason, we exclude this F test from the analysis of variance table.
However, as an approximate procedure to investigate the effect of the blocking variable,
examining the ratio of MSBlocks to MSE is certainly reasonable. If this ratio is large, it implies
that the blocking factor has a large effect and that the noise reduction obtained by blocking
was probably helpful in improving the precision of the comparison of treatment means.
The procedure is usually summarized in an ANOVA table, such as the one shown in
Table 4.2. The computing would usually be done with a statistical software package.
However, computing formulas for the sums of squares may be obtained for the elements in
Equation 4.7 by working directly with the identity
yij y.. (yi. y..) (y.j y..) (yij yi. y.j y..)
F0 MSTreatments
MSE
E(MSE) 2
E(MSBlocks) 2 
a 
b
j1
2
j
b 1
E(MSTreatments) 2 
b 
a
i1
2
i
a 1
4.1 The Randomized Complete Block Design
143
2 Actually, the normal-theory F distribution is an approximation to the randomization distribution generated by calculating F0 from
every possible assignment of the responses to the treatments.
