126
Chapter 3 ■Experiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
(3.62)
The a 1 equations (Equation 3.62) in a 1 unknowns are called the least squares
normal equations. Notice that if we add the last a normal equations, we obtain the rst normal
equation. Therefore, the normal equations are not linearly independent, and no unique solution
for , 1, . . . , a exists. This has happened because the effects model is overparameterized.
This difculty can be overcome by several methods. Because we have dened the treatment
effects as deviations from the overall mean, it seems reasonable to apply the constraint
(3.63)
Using this constraint, we obtain as the solution to the normal equations
(3.64)
This solution is obviously not unique and depends on the constraint (Equation 3.63) that
we have chosen. At rst this may seem unfortunate because two different experimenters could
analyze the same data and obtain different results if they apply different constraints. However,
certain functions of the model parameters are uniquely estimated, regardless of the con-
straint. Some examples are i j, which would be estimated by 
, and the
ith treatment mean i i, which would be estimated by 
.
Because we are usually interested in differences among the treatment effects rather than
their actual values, it causes no concern that the i cannot be uniquely estimated. In general,
any function of the model parameters that is a linear combination of the left-hand side of the
normal equations (Equations 3.48) can be uniquely estimated. Functions that are uniquely
estimated regardless of which constraint is used are called estimable functions. For more
information, see the supplemental material for this chapter. We are now ready to use these
parameter estimates in a general development of the analysis of variance.
3.10.2
The General Regression Signiﬁcance Test
A fundamental part of this procedure is writing the normal equations for the model. These
equations may always be obtained by forming the least squares function and differentiating it
with respect to each unknown parameter, as we did in Section 3.9.1. However, an easier
method is available. The following rules allow the normal equations for any experimental
design model to be written directly:
RULE 1. There is one normal equation for each parameter in the model to be estimated.
RULE 2. The right-hand side of any normal equation is just the sum of all observations
that contain the parameter associated with that particular normal equation.
To illustrate this rule, consider the single-factor model. The rst normal equation is for
the parameter ; therefore, the right-hand side is 
because all observations contain .
RULE 3. The left-hand side of any normal equation is the sum of all model parameters,
where each parameter is multiplied by the number of times it appears in the total on
the right-hand side. The parameters are written with a circumex 
to indicate that
they are estimators and not the true parameter values.
For example, consider the rst normal equation in a single-factor experiment. According
to the above rules, it would be
Nˆ nˆ1 nˆ2 Á nˆa y..
(ˆ)
y..
ˆ i ˆ ˆi yi.
ˆi ˆj yi. yj.
ˆi yi. y.. 
 i 1, 2, . . . , a
ˆ y..

a
i1
ˆi 0
nˆ                        nˆa  ya.
o
o
nˆ
  nˆ 2    
       y2!
