102
Chapter 3 ■Experiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
3.6
Sample Computer Output
Computer programs for supporting experimental design and performing the analysis of variance
are widely available. The output from one such program, Design-Expert, is shown in Figure
3.12, using the data from the plasma etching experiment in Example 3.1. The sum of squares
corresponding to the “Model” is the usual SSTreatments for a single-factor design. That source is
further identied as “A.” When there is more than one factor in the experiment, the model sum
of squares will be decomposed into several sources (A, B, etc.). Notice that the analysis of vari-
ance summary at the top of the computer output contains the usual sums of squares, degrees of
freedom, mean squares, and test statistic F0. The column “Prob F” is the P-value (actually,
the upper bound on the P-value because probabilities less than 0.0001 are defaulted to 0.0001).
In addition to the basic analysis of variance, the program displays some other useful
information. The quantity “R-squared” is dened as
and is loosely interpreted as the proportion of the variability in the data “explained” by the
ANOVA model. Thus, in the plasma etching experiment, the factor “power” explains about
92.61 percent of the variability in etch rate. Clearly, we must have 0 R2 1, with larg-
er values being more desirable. There are also some other R2-like statistics displayed in
the output. The “adjusted” R2 is a variation of the ordinary R2 statistic that reflects the
number of factors in the model. It can be a useful statistic for more complex experiments
with several design factors when we wish to evaluate the impact of increasing or decreas-
ing the number of model terms. “Std. Dev.” is the square root of the error mean square,
, and “C.V.” is the coefficient of variation, defined as 
. The
coefficient of variation measures the unexplained or residual variability in the data as a per-
centage of the mean of the response variable. “PRESS” stands for “prediction error sum of
squares,” and it is a measure of how well the model for the experiment is likely to predict
the responses in a new experiment. Small values of PRESS are desirable. Alternatively, one
can calculate an R2 for prediction based on PRESS (we will show how to do this later). This
in our problem is 0.8845, which is not unreasonable, considering that the model
accounts for about 93 percent of the variability in the current experiment. The “adequate
precision” statistic is computed by dividing the difference between the maximum predict-
ed response and the minimum predicted response by the average standard deviation of all
predicted responses. Large values of this quantity are desirable, and values that exceed four
usually indicate that the model will give reasonable performance in prediction.
Treatment means are estimated, and the standard error (or sample standard deviation of
each treatment mean,
) is displayed. Differences between pairs of treatment means
are investigated by using a hypothesis testing version of the Fisher LSD method described in
Section 3.5.7.
The computer program also calculates and displays the residuals, as dened in Equation
3.16. The program will also produce all of the residual plots that we discussed in Section 3.4.
There are also several other residual diagnostics displayed in the output. Some of these will be
discussed later. Design-Expert also displays the studentized residual (called “Student Residual”
in the output), calculate as 
where Leverageij is a measure of the inuence of the ijth observation on the model. We will dis-
cuss leverage in more detail and show how it is calculated in chapter 10. Studentized residuals
rij 
eij
MSE (1 Leverageij)
MSE/n
R2
Pred
(MSE/y )100
333.70 18.27
R2 SSModel
SSTotal
66,870.55
72,209.75 0.9261
