84
Chapter 3 ■Experiments with a Single Factor: The Analysis of Variance
The usual approach to dealing with nonconstant variance when it occurs for the above
reasons is to apply a variance-stabilizing transformation and then to run the analysis of
variance on the transformed data. In this approach, one should note that the conclusions of
the analysis of variance apply to the transformed populations.
Considerable research has been devoted to the selection of an appropriate transformation.
If experimenters know the theoretical distribution of the observations, they may utilize this
information in choosing a transformation. For example, if the observations follow the Poisson
distribution, the square root transformation
or 
would be used. If 
the data follow the lognormal distribution, the logarithmic transformation
is
appropriate. For binomial data expressed as fractions, the arcsin transformation
is useful. When there is no obvious transformation, the experimenter usually
empirically seeks a transformation that equalizes the variance regardless of the value of the mean.
We offer some guidance on this at the conclusion of this section. In factorial experiments, which
we introduce in Chapter 5, another approach is to select a transformation that minimizes the inter-
action mean square, resulting in an experiment that is easier to interpret. In Chapter 15, we discuss
in more detail methods for analytically selecting the form of the transformation. Transformations
made for inequality of variance also affect the form of the error distribution. In most cases, the
transformation brings the error distribution closer to normal. For more discussion of transforma-
tions, refer to Bartlett (1947), Dolby (1963), Box and Cox (1964), and Draper and Hunter (1969).
Statistical Tests for Equality of Variance. Although residual plots are frequently
used to diagnose inequality of variance, several statistical tests have also been proposed. These
tests may be viewed as formal tests of the hypotheses
A widely used procedure is Bartlett’s test. The procedure involves computing a statis-
tic whose sampling distribution is closely approximated by the chi-square distribution with 
a 1 degrees of freedom when the a random samples are from independent normal popula-
tions. The test statistic is
(3.19)
where
and 
is the sample variance of the ith population.
The quantity q is large when the sample variances 
differ greatly and is equal to zero
when all 
are equal. Therefore, we should reject H0 on values of 
that are too large; that
is, we reject H0 only when
where 
is the upper percentage point of the chi-square distribution with a 1 degrees
of freedom. The P-value approach to decision making could also be used.
Bartlett’s test is very sensitive to the normality assumption. Consequently, when the
validity of this assumption is doubtful, Bartlett’s test should not be used.
2
,a1
2
0 # 2
,a1
2
0
S 2
i
S 2
i
S 2
i
S 2
p 
a
i1
 (ni 1)S 2
i
N a
c 1 
1
3(a 1)
a
i1
 (ni 1)1 (N a)1
q (N a)log10 S 2
p 
a
i1
 (ni 1)log10 S 2
i
2
0 2.3026 q
c
H1above not true for at least one 2
i
H02
1 2
2 Á 2
a
y*ij arcsin yij
y*ij log yij
y*ij 1 yij
y*ij yij
