gauge capability study. The machine operates by pressing the tip into a metal test coupon, and
from the depth of the resulting depression, the hardness of the coupon can be determined. The
experimenter has decided to obtain four observations on Rockwell C-scale hardness for each tip.
There is only one factor—tip type—and a completely randomized single-factor design would
consist of randomly assigning each one of the 4 4  16 runs to an experimental unit, that
is, a metal coupon, and observing the hardness reading that results. Thus, 16 different metal test
coupons would be required in this experiment, one for each run in the design.
There is a potentially serious problem with a completely randomized experiment in this
design situation. If the metal coupons differ slightly in their hardness, as might happen if they
are taken from ingots that are produced in different heats, the experimental units (the
coupons) will contribute to the variability observed in the hardness data. As a result, the
experimental error will reect both random error and variability between coupons.
We would like to make the experimental error as small as possible; that is, we would
like to remove the variability between coupons from the experimental error. A design that
would accomplish this requires the experimenter to test each tip once on each of four
coupons. This design, shown in Table 4.1, is called a randomized complete block design
(RCBD). The word “complete” indicates that each block (coupon) contains all the treatments
(tips). By using this design, the blocks, or coupons, form a more homogeneous experimental
unit on which to compare the tips. Effectively, this design strategy improves the accuracy of
the comparisons among tips by eliminating the variability among the coupons. Within a
block, the order in which the four tips are tested is randomly determined. Notice the similar-
ity of this design problem to the paired t-test of Section 2.5.1. The randomized complete block
design is a generalization of that concept.
The RCBD is one of the most widely used experimental designs. Situations for which
the RCBD is appropriate are numerous. Units of test equipment or machinery are often dif-
ferent in their operating characteristics and would be a typical blocking factor. Batches of raw
material, people, and time are also common nuisance sources of variability in an experiment
that can be systematically controlled through blocking.1
Blocking may also be useful in situations that do not necessarily involve nuisance fac-
tors. For example, suppose that a chemical engineer is interested in the effect of catalyst feed
rate on the viscosity of a polymer. She knows that there are several factors, such as raw mate-
rial source, temperature, operator, and raw material purity that are very difcult to control in
the full-scale process. Therefore she decides to test the catalyst feed rate factor in blocks,
where each block consists of some combination of these uncontrollable factors. In effect, she
is using the blocks to test the robustness of her process variable (feed rate) to conditions she
cannot easily control. For more discussion of this, see Coleman and Montgomery (1993).
140
Chapter 4 ■Randomized Blocks, Latin Squares, and Related Designs
■T A B L E 4 . 1
Randomized Complete Block Design for the Hardness Testing Experiment
Test Coupon (Block)
1
2
3
4
Tip 3
Tip 3
Tip 2
Tip 1
Tip 1
Tip 4
Tip 1
Tip 4
Tip 4
Tip 2
Tip 3
Tip 2
Tip 2
Tip 1
Tip 4
Tip 3
1A special case of blocking occurs where the blocks are experimental units such as people, and each block receives the treatments own time
or the treatment effects are measured at different times. These are called repeated measures designs. They are discussed in chapter 15.
