206
Chapter 5 ■Introduction to Factorial Designs
In concluding this section, we note that the two-factor factorial model with one obser-
vation per cell (Equation 5.22) looks exactly like the randomized complete block model
(Equation 4.1). In fact, the Tukey single-degree-of-freedom test for nonadditivity can be
directly applied to test for interaction in the randomized block model. However, remember
that the experimental situations that lead to the randomized block and factorial models are
very different. In the factorial model, all ab runs have been made in random order, whereas
in the randomized block model, randomization occurs only within the block. The blocks are
a randomization restriction. Hence, the manner in which the experiments are run and the
interpretation of the two models are quite different.
5.4
The General Factorial Design
The results for the two-factor factorial design may be extended to the general case where there
are a levels of factor A, b levels of factor B, c levels of factor C, and so on, arranged in a fac-
torial experiment. In general, there will be abc . . . n total observations if there are n replicates
of the complete experiment. Once again, note that we must have at least two replicates (n 2)
to determine a sum of squares due to error if all possible interactions are included in the model.
If all factors in the experiment are xed, we may easily formulate and test hypotheses
about the main effects and interactions using the ANOVA. For a xed effects model, test sta-
tistics for each main effect and interaction may be constructed by dividing the corresponding
mean square for the effect or interaction by the mean square error. All of these F tests will be
upper-tail, one-tail tests. The number of degrees of freedom for any main effect is the num-
ber of levels of the factor minus one, and the number of degrees of freedom for an interaction
is the product of the number of degrees of freedom associated with the individual components
of the interaction.
For example, consider the three-factor analysis of variance model:
(5.26)
Assuming that A, B, and C are xed, the analysis of variance table is shown in Table 5.12.
The F tests on main effects and interactions follow directly from the expected mean squares.
Usually, the analysis of variance computations would be done using a statistics software
package. However, manual computing formulas for the sums of squares in Table 5.12 are
occasionally useful. The total sum of squares is found in the usual way as
(5.27)
The sums of squares for the main effects are found from the totals for factors A(yi...), B(y.j..),
and C(y..k.) as follows:
(5.28)
(5.29)
(5.30)
SSC 
1
abn 
c
k1
y2
..k. y2
....
abcn
SSB 
1
acn 
b
j1
y2
.j.. y2
....
abcn
SSA 
1
bcn 
a
i1
y2
i... y2
....
abcn
SST 
a
i1 
b
j1 
c
k1 
n
l1
y2
ijkl y2
....
abcn
 ()ijk ijkl 
 
i 1, 2, . . . , a
j 1, 2, . . . , b
k 1, 2, . . . , c
l 1, 2, . . . , n
yijkl i j k ()ij ()ik ()jk
