264
Chapter 6 ■The 2k Factorial Design
that Lenth’s method results in values of ME and SME that  are too conservative and have lit-
tle power to detect signicant effects. Simulation methods can be used to calibrate his proce-
dure. Larntz and Whitcomb (1998) suggest replacing the original ME and SME multipliers
with adjusted multipliers as follows:
Number of Contrasts
7
15
31
Original ME
3.764
2.571
2.218
Adjusted ME
2.295
2.140
2.082
Original SME
9.008
5.219
4.218
Adjusted SME
4.891
4.163
4.030
These are in close agreement with the results in Ye and Hamada (2000).
The JMP software package implements Lenth’s method as part of the screening plat-
form analysis procedure for two-level designs. In their implementation, P-values for each fac-
tor and interaction are computed from a “real-time” simulation. This simulation assumes that
none of the factors in the experiment are signicant and calculates the observed value of the
Lenth statistic 10,000 times for this null model. Then P-values are obtained by determining
where the observed Lenth statistics fall relative to the tails of these simulation-based refer-
ence distributions. These P-values can be used as guidance in selecting factors for the model.
Table 6.14 shows the JMP output from the screening analysis platform for the resin ltration
rate experiment in Example 6.2. Notice that in addition to the Lenth statistics, the JMP out-
put includes a half-normal plot of the effects and a “Pareto” chart of the effect (contrast) mag-
nitudes. When the factors are entered into the model, the Lenth procedure would recommend
including the same factors in the model that we identied previously.
The nal JMP output for the tted model is shown in Table 6.15. The Prediction Proﬁler
at the bottom of the table has been set to the levels of the factors than maximize ltration rate.
These are the same settings that we determined earlier by looking at the contour plots.
In general, the Lenth method is a clever and very useful procedure. However, we rec-
ommend using it as a supplement to the usual normal probability plot of effects, not as a
replacement for it.
Bisgaard (1998–1999) has provided a nice graphical technique, called a conditional
inference chart, to assist in interpreting the normal probability plot. The purpose of the graph
is to help the experimenter in judging signicant effects. This would be relatively easy if the
standard deviation were known, or if it could be estimated from the data. In unreplicated
designs, there is no internal estimate of , so the conditional inference chart is designed to
help the experimenter evaluate effect magnitude for a range of standard deviation values.
Bisgaard bases the graph on the result that the standard error of an effect in a two-level design
with N runs (for an unreplicated factorial, N  2k) is
where is the standard deviation of an individual observation. Then 2 times the standard
error of an effect is
Once the effects are estimated, plot a graph as shown in Figure 6.16, with the effect estimates plot-
ted along the vertical or y-axis. In this gure, we have used the effect estimates from Example 6.2.
The horizontal, or x-axis, of Figure 6.16 is a standard deviation () scale. The two lines are at
y 4
N
 
 and 
 y 4
N
4
N
2
N
