282
Chapter 6 ■The 2k Factorial Design
The least squares estimates of the model regression coefcients are exactly equal to one-half
of the usual effect estimates.
It turns out that the variance of any model regression coefcient is easy to nd:
All model regression coefcients have the same variance. Furthermore, there is no other
four-run design on the design space bounded by 1 that makes the variance of the model
regression coefcients smaller. In general, the variance of any model regression coefcient in
a 2k design where each design point is replicated n times is 
, where N
is the total number of runs in the design. This is the minimum possible variance for the regres-
sion coefcient.
For the 22 design, the determinant of the 
matrix is
This is the maximum possible value of the determinant for a four-run design on the design
space bounded by 1. It turns out that the volume of the joint condence region that contains
all the model regression coefcients is inversely proportional to the square root of the deter-
minant of 
. Therefore, to make this joint condence region as small as possible, we would
want to choose a design that makes the determinant of 
as large as possible. This is
accomplished by choosing the 22 design.
In general, a design that minimizes the variance of the model regression coefcients is
called a D-optimal design. The D terminology is used because these designs are found by
selecting runs in the design to maximize the determinant of 
. The 2k design is a D-optimal
design for tting the rst-order model or the rst-order model with interaction. Many com-
puter software packages, such as JMP, Design-Expert, and Minitab, have algorithms for nd-
ing D-optimal designs. These algorithms can be very useful in constructing experimental
designs for many practical situations. We will make use of them in subsequent chapters.
Now consider the variance of the predicted response in the 22 design
The variance of the predicted response is a function of the point in the design space where the
prediction is made (x1 and x2) and the variance of the model regression coefcients. The esti-
mates of the regression coefcients are independent because the 22 design is orthogonal and
they all have variance 
, so
The maximum prediction variance occurs when 
and is equal to 2. To
determine how good this is, we need to know the best possible value of prediction variance that
x1 x2 1
2
4 (1 x1
2 x2
2 x1
2x2
2)
V [yˆ(x1,x2)] V(ˆ
0 ˆ
1x1 ˆ
2x2 ˆ
12x1x2)
24
V [yˆ(x1 x2)] V(ˆ
0 ˆ
1x1 ˆ
2x2 ˆ
12x1x2)
XX
XX
XX
(XX)256
XX
V(ˆ) 2(n2k) 2N
2
4
V( ˆ) 2(diagonal element of (XX)1)

(1) a b ab
4
(1) a b ab
4
(1) a b ab
4
(1) a b ab
4
