256
Chapter 6 ■The 2k Factorial Design
resources only allow a single replicate of the design to be run, unless the experimenter is
willing to omit some of the original factors.
An obvious risk when conducting an experiment that has only one run at each test com-
bination is that we may be tting a model to noise. That is, if the response y is highly vari-
able, misleading conclusions may result from the experiment. The situation is illustrated in
Figure 6.9a. In this gure, the straight line represents the true factor effect. However, because
of the random variability present in the response variable (represented by the shaded band),
the experimenter actually obtains the two measured responses represented by the dark dots.
Consequently, the estimated factor effect is close to zero, and the experimenter has reached
an erroneous conclusion concerning this factor. Now if there is less variability in the response,
the likelihood of an erroneous conclusion will be smaller. Another way to ensure that reliable
effect estimates are obtained is to increase the distance between the low () and high () lev-
els of the factor, as illustrated in Figure 6.9b. Notice that in this gure, the increased distance
between the low and high factor levels results in a reasonable estimate of the true factor effect.
The single-replicate strategy is often used in screening experiments when there are rel-
atively many factors under consideration. Because we can never be entirely certain in such
cases that the experimental error is small, a good practice in these types of experiments is to
spread out the factor levels aggressively. You might nd it helpful to reread the guidance on
choosing factor levels in Chapter 1.
A single replicate of a 2k design is sometimes called an unreplicated factorial. With
only one replicate, there is no internal estimate of error (or “pure error”). One approach to the
analysis of an unreplicated factorial is to assume that certain high-order interactions are neg-
ligible and combine their mean squares to estimate the error. This is an appeal to the sparsity
of effects principle; that is, most systems are dominated by some of the main effects and low-
order interactions, and most high-order interactions are negligible.
While the effect sparsity principle has been observed by experimenters for many decades,
only recently has it been studied more objectively. A paper by Li, Sudarsanam, and Frey (2006)
studied 113 response variables obtained from 43 published experiments from a wide range of sci-
ence and engineering disciplines. All of the experiments were full factorials with between three
and seven factors, so no assumptions had to be made about interactions. Most of the experiments
had either three or four factors. The authors found that about 40 percent of the main effects in
the experiments they studied were signicant, while only about 11 percent of the two-factor inter-
actions were signicant. Three-factor interactions were very rare, occurring only about 5 percent
of the time. The authors also investigated the absolute values of factor effects for main effects,
two-factor interactions, and three-factor interactions. The median of main effect strength was
about four times larger than the median strength of two-factor interactions. The median strength
Estimate of
factor effect
Factor, x
(a) Small distance between factor levels
Response, y
–
+
True
factor
effect
Estimate of
factor effect
Factor, x
(b) Aggressive spacing of factor levels
Response, y
–
+
True
factor
effect
■F I G U R E 6 . 9
The impact of the choice of factor levels in an unreplicated design
