If a factorial experiment had been performed, an additional treatment combination,
AΌΑΕBΌΑΕ, would have been taken. Now, using just four observations, two estimates of the A
effect can be made: AΌΑΕBΌΑΑΌΑΑAΌΑΑBΌΑΑand AΌΑΕBΌΑΕΌΑΑAΌΑΑBΌΑΕ. Similarly, two estimates of the B
effect can be made. These two estimates of each main effect could be averaged to produce
average main effects that are just as precise as those from the single-factor experiment, but
only four total observations are required and we would say that the relative efΌΒσciency of the
factorial design to the one-factor-at-a-time experiment is (6/4) ΌΑΔ1.5. Generally, this relative
efΌΒσciency will increase as the number of factors increases, as shown in Figure 5.8.
Now suppose interaction is present. If the one-factor-at-a-time design indicated that 
AΌΑΑBΌΑΕand AΌΑΕBΌΑΑgave better responses than AΌΑΑBΌΑΑ, a logical conclusion would be that AΌΑΕBΌΑΕ
would be even better. However, if interaction is present, this conclusion may be seriously in
error. For an example, refer to the experiment in Figure 5.2.
In summary, note that factorial designs have several advantages. They are more efΌΒσcient
than one-factor-at-a-time experiments. Furthermore, a factorial design is necessary when
interactions may be present to avoid misleading conclusions. Finally, factorial designs allow
the effects of a factor to be estimated at several levels of the other factors, yielding conclu-
sions that are valid over a range of experimental conditions.
5.3
The Two-Factor Factorial Design
5.3.1
An Example
The simplest types of factorial designs involve only two factors or sets of treatments. There
are a levels of factor A and b levels of factor B, and these are arranged in a factorial design;
that is, each replicate of the experiment contains all ab treatment combinations. In general,
there are n replicates.
As an example of a factorial design involving two factors, an engineer is designing a bat-
tery for use in a device that will be subjected to some extreme variations in temperature. The
only design parameter that he can select at this point is the plate material for the battery, and he
has three possible choices. When the device is manufactured and is shipped to the ΌΒσeld, the engi-
neer has no control over the temperature extremes that the device will encounter, and he knows
from experience that temperature will probably affect the effective battery life. However, tem-
perature can be controlled in the product development laboratory for the purposes of a test.
5.3 The Two-Factor Factorial Design
187
Factor A
Factor B
έΑΥ
+
έΑΥ
+
AέΑΥB+
AέΑΥBέΑΥ
A+BέΑΥ
3
2
4
Number of factors
5
6
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Relative efficiency
έΨιF I G U R E 5 . 7
A one-
factor-at-a-time experiment
έΨιF I G U R E 5 . 8
Relative efΎυΒciency of a
factorial design to a one-factor-at-a-time experi-
ment (two factor levels)
