6.3 The 23 Design
251
is a statistic that is adjusted for the “size” of the model, that is, the number of factors. The
adjusted R2 can actually decrease if nonsignicant terms are added to a model. The PRESS
statistic is a measure of how well the model will predict new data. (PRESS is actually an
acronym for prediction error sum of squares, and it is computed as the sum of the squared
prediction errors obtained by predicting the ith data point with a model that includes all obser-
vations except the ith one.) A model with a small value of PRESS indicates that the model is
likely to be a good predictor. The “Prediction R2” statistic is computed as
This indicates that the full model would be expected to explain about 86 percent of the vari-
ability in new data.
The next portion of the output presents the regression coefcient for each model term
and the standard error of each coefcient, dened as
The standard errors of all model coefcients are equal because the design is orthogonal. The
95 percent condence intervals on each regression coefcient are computed from
where the degrees of freedom on t are the number of degrees of freedom for error; that is,
N is the total number of runs in the experiment (16), and p is the number of model para-
meters (8). The full model in terms of both the coded variables and the natural variables is
also presented.
The last part of the display in Table 6.7 illustrates the output following the removal of
the nonsignicant interaction terms. This reduced model now contains only the main effects
A, C, and the AC interaction. The error or residual sum of squares is now composed of a
pure error component arising from the replication of the eight corners of the cube and a lack-
of-ﬁt component consisting of the sums of squares for the factors that were dropped from the
model (B, AB, BC, and ABC). Once again, the regression model representation of the experi-
mental results is given in terms of both coded and natural variables. The proportion of total vari-
ability in etch rate that is explained by this model is
which is smaller than the R2 for the full model. Notice, however, that the adjusted R2 for the
reduced model is actually slightly larger than the adjusted R2 for the full model, and PRESS
for the reduced model is considerably smaller, leading to a larger value of 
for the reduced
model. Clearly, removing the nonsignicant terms from the full model has produced a nal
model that is likely to function more effectively as a predictor of new data. Notice that the
condence intervals on the regression coefcients for the reduced model are shorter than the
corresponding condence intervals for the full model.
The last part of the output presents the residuals from the reduced model. Design-
Expert will also construct all of the residual plots that we have previously discussed.
Other Methods for Judging the Signicance of Effects. The analysis of variance
is a formal way to determine which factor effects are nonzero. Several other methods are use-
ful. Below, we show how to calculate the standard error of the effects, and we use these stan-
dard errors to construct conﬁdence intervals on the effects. Another method, which we will
illustrate in Section 6.5, uses normal probability plots to assess the importance of the effects.
R2
Pred
R2 SSModel
SSTotal
5.106  105
5.314  105 0.9608
ˆ t0.025,Npse(ˆ ) ˆ t0.025,Npse(ˆ )
se(ˆ) V(ˆ) 
MSE
n2k 
MSE
N

2252.56
2(8)
11.87
R2
Pred 1 PRESS
SSTotal
1 
72,082.00
5.314  105 0.8644
