We have indicated that if all the factors in a factorial experiment are xed, test statistic
construction is straightforward. The statistic for testing any main effect or interaction is
always formed by dividing the mean square for the main effect or interaction by the mean
square error. However, if the factorial experiment involves one or more random factors, the
test statistic construction is not always done this way. We must examine the expected mean
squares to determine the correct tests. We defer a complete discussion of experiments with
random factors until Chapter 13.
5.5
Fitting Response Curves and Surfaces
The ANOVA always treats all of the factors in the experiment as if they were qualitative or cat-
egorical. However, many experiments involve at least one quantitative factor. It can be useful
to t a response curve to the levels of a quantitative factor so that the experimenter has an
equation that relates the response to the factor. This equation might be used for interpolation,
that is, for predicting the response at factor levels between those actually used in the experi-
ment. When at least two factors are quantitative, we can t a response surface for predicting
y at various combinations of the design factors. In general, linear regression methods are used
to t these models to the experimental data. We illustrated this procedure in Section 3.5.1 for
an experiment with a single factor. We now present two examples involving factorial experi-
ments. In both examples, we will use a computer software package to generate the regression
models. For more information about regression analysis, refer to Chapter 10 and the supple-
mental text material for this chapter.
5.5 Fitting Response Curves and Surfaces
211
E X A M P L E 5 . 4
Consider the battery life experiment described in Exa-
mple 5.1. The factor temperature is quantitative, and the
material type is qualitative. Furthermore, there are three
levels of temperature. Consequently, we can compute a
linear and a quadratic temperature effect to study how
temperature affects the battery life. Table 5.15 presents
condensed output from Design-Expert for this experiment
and assumes that temperature is quantitative and material
type is qualitative.
The ANOVA in Table 5.15 shows that the “model”
source of variability has been subdivided into several
components. The components “A” and “A2” represent the
10
12
14
Percent carbonation (A)
Distribution of
percent carbonation
Improved distribution of
percent carbonation 
Average fill height deviation at
high speed and low pressure
–2
0
2
4
6
8
■F I G U R E 5 . 1 7
Average ﬁll height deviation at high speed
and low pressure for different carbonation
levels
