6.5 A Single Replicate of the 2k Design
267
In our example, N 16, so the lines are at y  and y  . Thus, for any given value
of the standard deviation , we can read off the distance between these two lines as an approx-
imate 95 percent condence interval on the negligible effects.
In Figure 6.16, we observe that if the experimenter thinks that the standard deviation is
between 4 and 8, then factors A, C, D, and the AC and AD interactions are signicant. If he or
she thinks that the standard deviation is as large as 10, factor C may not be signicant. That is,
for any given assumption about the magnitude of , the experimenter can construct a “yardstick”
for judging the approximate signicance of effects. The chart can also be used in reverse. For
example, suppose that we were uncertain about whether factor C is signicant. The experimenter
could then ask whether it is reasonable to expect that could be as large as 10 or more. If it is
unlikely that is as large as 10, then we can conclude that C is signicant.
Effect of Outliers in Unreplicated Designs. Experimenters often worry about the
impact of outliers in unreplicated designs, concerned that the outlier will invalidate the analy-
sis and render the results of the experiment useless. This usually isn’t a major concern. The
reason for this is that the effect estimates are reasonably robust to outliers. To see this,
consider an unreplicated 24 design with an outlier for (say) the cd treatment combination. The
effect of any factor, say for example A, is
and the cd response appears in only one of the averages, in this case 
. The average 
is
an average of eight observations (half of the 16 runs in the 24), so the impact of the outlier cd
is damped out by averaging it with the other seven runs. This will happen with all of the other
effect estimates. As an illustration, consider the 24 design in the resin ltration rate experi-
ment of Example 6.2. Suppose that the run 
(the correct response was 75). Figure
6.17a shows the half-normal plot of the effects. It is obvious that the correct set of important
effects is identied on the graph. However, the half-normal plot gives an indication that an out-
lier may be present. Notice that the straight line identifying the nonsignicant effects does not
point toward the origin. In fact, the reference line from the origin is not even close to the
cd 375
yA
yA
A yAyA
–6
–2
2
4
6
8
10
σ
2
6
10
14
18
22
A
AD
D
C
AC
–10
–14
–18
–22
 +4 σ/ N
√
 –4 σ/ N
√
■F I G U R E 6 . 1 6
A conditional
inference chart for Example 6.2
