6.5 A Single Replicate of the 2k Design
255
model, usually consists of removing any nonsignicant variables from the full model. Step 5
is the usual residual analysis to check for model adequacy and assumptions. Sometimes
model renement will occur after residual analysis if we nd that the model is inadequate or
assumptions are badly violated. The nal step usually consists of graphical analysis—either
main effect or interaction plots, or response surface and contour plots.
Although the calculations described above are almost always done with a computer,
occasionally it is necessary to manually calculate an effect estimate or sum of squares for an
effect. To estimate an effect or to compute the sum of squares for an effect, we must rst
determine the contrast associated with that effect. This can always be done by using a table
of plus and minus signs, such as Table 6.2 or Table 6.3. However, this is awkward for large
values of k and we can use an alternate method. In general, we determine the contrast for
effect 
by expanding the right-hand side of
(6.21)
In expanding Equation 6.21, ordinary algebra is used with “1” being replaced by (1) in the
nal expression. The sign in each set of parentheses is negative if the factor is included in the
effect and positive if the factor is not included.
To illustrate the use of Equation 6.21, consider a 23 factorial design. The contrast for AB
would be
As a further example, in a 25 design, the contrast for ABCD would be
Once the contrasts for the effects have been computed, we may estimate the effects and
compute the sums of squares according to
(6.22)
and
(6.23)
respectively, where n denotes the number of replicates. There is also a tabular algorithm due
to Frank Yates that can occasionally be useful for manual calculation of the effect estimates
and the sums of squares. Refer to the supplemental text material for this chapter.
6.5
A Single Replicate of the 2k Design
For even a moderate number of factors, the total number of treatment combinations in a 2k
factorial design is large. For example, a 25 design has 32 treatment combinations, a 26 design
has 64 treatment combinations, and so on. Because resources are usually limited, the number
of replicates that the experimenter can employ may be restricted. Frequently, available
SSAB Á K 1
n2k(ContrastAB Á K)2
AB Á K 2
n2k(ContrastAB Á K)
 
be ce abce de abde acde bcde
 
abc d abd acd bcd ae
 
ad bc ac ab (1) a b c
 
ace abe e abcd cd bd
abcde cde bde ade bce
 ContrastABCD (a 1)(b 1)(c 1)(d 1)(e 1)
abc ab c (1) ac bc a b
 ContrastAB (a 1)(b 1)(c 1)
ContrastAB Á K (a 1)(b 1) Á (k 1)
AB Á K
