6.7 2k Designs are Optimal Designs
283
we can attain. It turns out that the smallest possible value of the maximum prediction variance
over the design space is pţÇÇ2/N, where p is the number of model parameters and N is the num-
ber of runs in the design. The 22 design has N ţÇâ4 runs and the model has p ţÇâ4 parameters,
so the model that we ţüęt to the data from this experiment minimizes the maximum prediction
variance over the design region. A design that has this property is called a G-optimal design.
In general, 2k designs are G-optimal designs for ţüętting the ţüęrst-order model or the ţüęrst-order
model with interaction.
We can evaluate the prediction variance at any point of interest in the design space. For
example, when we are at the center of the design where 
, the prediction variance is
When 
and 
, the prediction variance is
An alternative to evaluating the prediction variance at a lot of points in the design space
is to consider the average prediction variance over the design space. One way to calculate
this average prediction variance is
where A is the area (in general the volume) of the design space. To compute the average, we are
integrating the variance function over the design space and dividing by the area of the region.
Sometimes I is called the integrated variance criterion. Now for a 22 design, the area
of the design region is 
, and
It turns out that this is the smallest possible value of the average prediction variance that
can be obtained from a four-run design used to ţüęt a ţüęrst-order model with interaction on this
design space. A design with this property is called an I-optimal design. In general, 2k designs
are I-optimal designs for ţüętting the ţüęrst-order model or the ţüęrst-order model with interaction.
The JMP software will construct I-optimal designs. This can be very useful in constructing
designs when response prediction is the goal of the experiment.
It is also possible to display the prediction variance over the design space graphically.
Figure 6.36 is output from JMP illustrating three possible displays of the prediction variance
from a 22 design. The ţüęrst graph is the prediction variance pro´Čüler, which plots the
unscaled prediction variance
against the levels of each design factor. The ÔÇťcrosshairsÔÇŁ on the graphs are adjustable, so that
the unscaled prediction variance can be displayed at any desired combination of the variables
UPV ţÇâV[y╦ć(x1, x2)]
ţÇÇ2
ţÇâ4ţÇÇ2
9
ţÇâ1
4ţÇü
1
ţÇÇ1ţÇü
1
ţÇÇ1
ţÇÇ21
4(1 ţÇäx1
2 ţÇäx2
2 ţÇäx1
2x2
2)dx1dx2
I ţÇâ1
AţÇü
1
ţÇÇ1ţÇü
1
ţÇÇ1
V[y╦ć(x1, x2)]dx1dx2
A ţÇâ4
I ţÇâ1
AţÇü
1
ţÇÇ1ţÇü
1
ţÇÇ1
V[y╦ć(x1, x2)]dx1dx2
V [y╦ć(x1 ţÇâ1, x2 ţÇâ0)] ţÇâţÇÇ2
2
x2 ţÇâ0
x1 ţÇâ1
V [y╦ć(x1 ţÇâ0, x2 ţÇâ0)] ţÇâţÇÇ2
4
x1 ţÇâx2 ţÇâ0
