6.8 The Addition of Center Points to the 2k Design
289
Central composite designs are used extensively in building second-order response sur-
face models. These designs will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 11.
We conclude this section with a few additional useful suggestions and observations con-
cerning the use of center points.
1. When a factorial experiment is conducted in an ongoing process, consider using the
current operating conditions (or recipe) as the center point in the design. This often
assures the operating personnel that at least some of the runs in the experiment are
going to be performed under familiar conditions, and so the results obtained (at
least for these runs) are unlikely to be any worse than are typically obtained.
2. When the center point in a factorial experiment corresponds to the usual operating
recipe, the experimenter can use the observed responses at the center point to pro-
vide a rough check of whether anything “unusual” occurred during the experiment.
That is, the center point responses should be very similar to the responses observed
historically in routine process operation. Often operating personnel will maintain a
control chart for monitoring process performance. Sometimes the center point
responses can be plotted directly on the control chart as a check of the manner in
which the process was operating during the experiment.
3. Consider running the replicates at the center point in nonrandom order.
Specically, run one or two center points at or near the beginning of the experi-
ment, one or two near the middle, and one or two near the end. By spreading the
center points out in time, the experimenter has a rough check on the stability of the
process during the experiment. For example, if a trend has occurred in the response
while the experiment was performed, plotting the center point responses versus
time order may reveal this.
4. Sometimes experiments must be conducted in situations where there is little or no
prior information about process variability. In these cases, running two or three cen-
ter points as the rst few runs in the experiment can be very helpful. These runs can
provide a preliminary estimate of variability. If the magnitude of the variability seems
reasonable, continue; on the contrary, if larger than anticipated (or reasonable!) vari-
ability is observed, stop. Often it will be very protable to study the question of why
the variability is so large before proceeding with the rest of the experiment.
5. Usually, center points are employed when all design factors are quantitative.
However, sometimes there will be one or more qualitative or categorical variables
and several quantitative ones. Center points can still be employed in these cases. To
illustrate, consider an experiment with two quantitative factors, time and tempera-
ture, each at two levels, and a single qualitative factor, catalyst type, also with two
levels (organic and nonorganic). Figure 6.40 shows the 23 design for these factors.
Notice that the center points are placed in the opposed faces of the cube that involve
Time
Temperature
Catalyst
type
■F I G U R E 6 . 4 0
A 23 factorial
design with one qualitative factor and
center points
