374
Chapter 8 ■Two-Level Fractional Factorial Designs
V design, permitting study of ve factors and estimation of all ve main effects and all 10 two-
factor interactions in only 16 runs. We illustrated the use of this design in Example 8.2.
The smallest design of resolution at least V for k 6 factors is the 
design with 32
runs, which is of resolution VI. For k 7 factors, it is the 64-run 
which is of resolution VII,
and for k 8 factors, it is the 64 run 
design. For k 9 or more factors, all these designs
require at least 128 runs. These are very large designs, so statisticians have long been interest-
ed in smaller alternatives that maintain the desired resolution. Mee (2004) gives a survey of this
topic. Nonregular fractions can be very useful. This will be discussed further in chapter 9. 
8.8
Supersaturated Designs
A saturated design is dened as a fractional factorial in which the number of factors or design
variables k N 1, where N is the number of runs. In recent years, considerable interest has
been shown in developing and using supersaturated designs for factor screening experi-
ments. In a supersaturated design, the number of variables k N 1, and usually these
designs contain quite a few more variables than runs. The idea of using supersaturated designs
was rst proposed by Satterthwaite (1959). He proposed generating these designs at random.
In an extensive discussion of this paper, some of the leading authorities in experimental
design of the day, including Jack Youden, George Box, J. Stuart Hunter, William Cochran,
John Tukey, Oscar Kempthorne, and Frank Anscombe, criticized random balanced designs.
As a result, supersaturated designs received little attention for the next 30 years. A notable
exception is the systematic supersaturated design developed by Booth and Cox (1962). Their
designs were not randomly generated, which was a signicant departure from Satterthwaite’s
proposal. They generated their designs with elementary computer search methods. They also
developed the basic criteria by which supersaturated designs are judged.
Lin (1993) revisited the supersaturated design concept and stimulated much additional
research on the topic. Many authors have proposed methods to construct supersaturated
designs. A good survey is in Lin (2000). Most design construction techniques are limited
computer search procedures based on simple heuristics [see Lin (1995), Li and Wu (1997),
and Holcomb and Carlyle (2002), for example]. Others have proposed methods based on opti-
mal design construction techniques (we will discuss optimal designs in Chapter 11).
Another construction method for supersaturated designs is based on the structure of
existing orthogonal designs. These include using the half-fraction of Hadamard matrices [Lin
(1993)] and enumerating the two-factor interactions of certain Hadamard matrices [Wu (1997)].
A Hadamard matrix is a square orthogonal matrix whose elements are either 1 or 1.
When the number of factors in the experiment exceeds the number of runs, the design matrix
cannot be orthogonal. Consequently, the factor effect estimates are not independent. An
experiment with one dominant factor may contaminate and obscure the contribution of anoth-
er factor. Supersaturated designs are created to minimize this amount of nonorthogonality
between factors. Supersaturated designs can also be constructed using the optimal design
approach. The custom designer in JMP uses this approach to constructing supersaturated
designs.
The supersaturated designs that are based on the half fraction of a Hadamard matrix are
very easy to construct. Table 8.34 is the Plackett–Burman design for N 12 runs and k 11
factors. It is also a Hadamard matrix design. In the table, the design has been sorted by the
signs in the last column (Factor 11 or L). This is sometimes called the branching column.
Now retain only the runs that are positive (say) in column L from the design and delete col-
umn L from this group of runs. The resulting design is a supersaturated design for k 10 fac-
tors in N 6 runs. We could have used the runs that are negative in column L equally well.
282
V
271
VII
261
VI
