6.10 Problems
303
(a) Analyze the lead response for ţüęshbone apatite. What
factors are important?
(b) Analyze the residuals from this response and comment
on model adequacy.
(c) Analyze the pH response for ţüęshbone apatite. What
factors are important?
(d) Analyze the residuals from this response and comment
on model adequacy.
(e) Analyze the lead response for hydroxyapatite apatite.
What factors are important?
(f) Analyze the residuals from this response and comment
on model adequacy.
(g) Analyze the pH response for hydroxyapatite apatite.
What factors are important?
(h) Analyze the residuals from this response and comment
on model adequacy.
(i) What differences do you see between ţüęshbone and
hydroxyapatite apatite? The authors of this paper con-
cluded that that ţüęshbone apatite was comparable to
hydroxyapatite apatite. Because the ţüęshbone apatite is
cheaper, it was recommended for adoption. Do you
agree with these conclusions?
6.43.
Often the ţüętted regression model from a 2k factorial
design is used to make predictions at points of interest in the
design space. Assume that the model contains all main effects
and two-factor interactions.
(a) Find the variance of the predicted response at a point
x1, x2, . . . , xk in the design space. Hint: Remember that
the xÔÇÖs are coded variables and assume a 2k design with
y╦ć
an equal number of replicates n at each design point so
that the variance of a regression coefţüęcient 
is
ţÇÇ2/(n2k) and that the covariance between any pair of
regression coefţüęcients is zero.
(b) Use the result in part (a) to ţüęnd an equation for a 100(1
ţÇÇţÇç) percent conţüędence interval on the true mean
response at the point x1, x2, . . . , xk in design space.
6.44.
Hierarchical models. Several times we have used the
hierarchy principle in selecting a model; that is, we have
included nonsigniţüęcant lower order terms in a model because
they were factors involved in signiţüęcant higher order terms.
Hierarchy is certainly not an absolute principle that must be
followed in all cases. To illustrate, consider the model result-
ing from Problem 6.1, which required that a nonsigniţüęcant
main effect be included to achieve hierarchy. Using the data
from Problem 6.1.
(a) Fit both the hierarchical and the nonhierarchical models.
(b) Calculate the PRESS statistic, the adjusted R2, and the
mean square error for both models.
(c) Find a 95 percent conţüędence interval on the estimate
of the mean response at a cube corner (x1 ţÇâx2 ţÇâ x3 ţÇâ
ţÇł1). Hint: Use the results of Problem 6.36.
(d) Based on the analyses you have conducted, which
model do you prefer?
6.45.
Suppose that you want to run a 23 factorial design. The
variance of an individual observation is expected to be about 4.
Suppose that you want the length of a 95 percent conţüędence
interval on any effect to be less than or equal to 1.5. How many
replicates of the design do you need to run?
ţÇü╦ć
