8.7 Resolution IV and V Designs
371
The generators for the original fractions are E ABC and F BCD, and because we
changed the signs in column A to create the fold over, the generators for the second group of
16 runs are E  ABC and F BCD. Since there is only one word of like sign (L 1, U 1)
and the combined design has only one generator (it is a one-half fraction), the generator for
the combined design is F BCD. Furthermore, since ABCE is positive in block 1 and ABCE
is negative in block 2, ABCE plus its alias ADEF are confounded with blocks.
Examination of the alias chains involving the two-factor interactions for the original 16-
run design and the completed fold over reveals some troubling information. In the original
resolution IV fraction, every two-factor interaction was aliased with another two-factor inter-
action in six alias chains, and in one alias chain there were three two-factor interactions (refer
to Table 8.8). Thus, seven degrees of freedom were available to estimate two-factor interac-
tions. In the completed fold over, there are nine two-factor interactions that are estimated free
of other two-factor interactions and three alias chains involving two two-factor interactions,
resulting in 12 degrees of freedom for estimating two-factor interactions. Put another way, we
used 16 additional runs but only gained ve additional degrees of freedom for estimating two-
factor interactions. This is not a terribly efcient use of experimental resources.
Fortunately, there is another alternative to using a complete fold over. In a partial fold over
(or semifold) we make only half of the runs required for a complete fold over, which for the spin
coater experiment would be eight runs. The following steps will produce a partial fold-over design:
1. Construct a single-factor fold over from the original design in the usual way by
changing the signs on a factor that is involved in a two-factor interaction of interest.
2. Select only half of the fold-over runs by choosing those runs where the chosen fac-
tor is either at its high or low level. Selecting the level that you believe will gener-
ate the most desirable response is usually a good idea.
Table 8.33 is the partial fold-over design for the spin coater experiment. Notice that we
selected the runs where A is at its low level because in the original set of 16 runs (Table 8.31),
05
10
20
30
50
70
80
90
0.00
38.20
76.41
|Effect|
114.61
152.81
95
99
Half-normal % probability
C
CE
B
A
E
■F I G U R E 8 . 2 6
Half-normal
plot of effects for the spin coater
experiment in Table 8.32
