8.4 The General 2kţÇép Fractional Factorial Design
345
E X A M P L E 8 . 6
A ţüęve-axis CNC machine is used to produce an impeller for
a jet turbine engine. The blade proţüęles are an important
quality characteristic. Speciţüęcally, the deviation of the
blade proţüęle from the proţüęle speciţüęed on the engineering
drawing is of interest. An experiment is run to determine
which machine parameters affect proţüęle deviation. The
eight factors selected for the design are as follows:
Factor
Low Level (ţÇé) High Level (ţÇć)
A ţÇâx-Axis shift 
0
15
(0.001 in.)
B ţÇây-Axis shift 
0
15
(0.001 in.)
C ţÇâz-Axis shift (0.001 in.)
0
15
D ţÇâTool supplier
1
2
E ţÇâa-Axis shift (0.001 deg)
0
30
F ţÇâSpindle speed (%)
90
110
G ţÇâFixture height (0.001 in.)
0
15
H ţÇâFeed rate (%)
90
110
One test blade on each part is selected for inspection. The
proţüęle deviation is measured using a coordinate measuring
machine, and the standard deviation of the difference
between the actual proţüęle and the speciţüęed proţüęle is used
as the response variable.
The machine has four spindles. Because there may be
differences in the spindles, the process engineers feel that
the spindles should be treated as blocks.
The engineers feel conţüędent that three-factor and high-
er interactions are not too important, but they are reluctant
to ignore the two-factor interactions. From Table 8.14, two
designs initially appear appropriate: the 
design with 16
runs and the 
design with 32 runs. Appendix Table X(1)
indicates that if the 16-run design is used, there will be
fairly extensive aliasing of two-factor interactions.
Furthermore, this design cannot be run in four blocks with-
out confounding four two-factor interactions with blocks.
Therefore, the experimenters decide to use the 
design
in four blocks. This confounds one three-factor interaction
alias chain and one two-factor interaction (EH) and its
three-factor interaction aliases with blocks. The EH interac-
28ţÇÇ3
IV
28ţÇÇ3
IV
28ţÇÇ4
IV
tion is the interaction between the a-axis shift and the feed
rate, and the engineers consider an interaction between
these two variables to be fairly unlikely.
Table 8.16 contains the design and the resulting
responses as standard deviation ţÇů103 in.. Because the
response variable is a standard deviation, it is often best to
perform the analysis following a log transformation. The
effect estimates are shown in Table 8.17. Figure 8.19 is a
normal probability plot of the effect estimates, using ln
(standard deviation ţÇů103) as the response variable. The
only large effects are A ţÇâx-axis shift, B ţÇây-axis shift,
and the alias chain involving AD ţÇäBG. Now AD is the 
x-axis shift-tool supplier interaction, and BG is the y-axis
shift-ţüęxture height interaction, and since these two interac-
tions are aliased it is impossible to separate them based on
the data from the current experiment. Since both interac-
tions involve one large main effect it is also difţüęcult to
apply any ÔÇťobviousÔÇŁ simplifying logic such as effect heredity
to the situation either. If there is some engineering knowl-
edge or process knowledge available that sheds light on the
situation, then perhaps a choice could be made between the
two interactions; otherwise, more data will be required to
separate these two effects. (The problem of adding runs to
a fractional factorial to de-alias interactions is discussed in
Sections 8.6 and 8.7.)
Suppose that process knowledge suggests that the
appropriate interaction is likely to be AD. Table 8.18 is the
resulting analysis of variance for the model with factors A,
B, D, and AD (factor D was included to preserve the hierar-
chy principle). Notice that the block effect is small, sug-
gesting that the machine spindles are not very different.
Figure 8.20 is a normal probability plot of the residuals
from this experiment. This plot is suggestive of slightly
heavier than normal tails, so possibly other transformations
should be considered. The AD interaction plot is in Figure
8.21. Notice that tool supplier (D) and the magnitude of the
x-axis shift (A) have a profound impact on the variability of
the blade proţüęle from design speciţüęcations. Running A at
the low level (0 offset) and buying tools from supplier 1
gives the best results. Figure 8.22 shows the projection of
this 
design into four replicates of a 23 design in factors
A, B, and D. The best combination of operating conditions
is A at the low level (0 offset), B at the high level (0.015 in
offset), and D at the low level (tool supplier 1).
28ţÇÇ3
IV
principal block contains those treatment combinations that have an even number of letters in
common with ABD. These are also the treatment combinations for which L ţÇâx1 ţÇäx2 ţÇäx4 ţÇâ
0 (mod 2).
