344
Chapter 8 ■Two-Level Fractional Factorial Designs
that is not a word in the dening relation. There are 35 subsets of four factors, seven of which
appear in the complete dening relation (see Table 8.15). Thus, there are 28 subsets of four
factors that would form 24 designs. One combination that is obvious upon inspecting Table
8.15 is A, B, C, and D.
To illustrate the usefulness of this projection properly, suppose that we are conducting
an experiment to improve the efciency of a ball mill and the seven factors are as follows:
1. Motor speed
2. Gain
3. Feed mode
4. Feed sizing
5. Material type
6. Screen angle
7. Screen vibration level
We are fairly certain that motor speed, feed mode, feed sizing, and material type will affect
efciency and that these factors may interact. The role of the other three factors is less well
known, but it is likely that they are negligible. A reasonable strategy would be to assign motor
speed, feed mode, feed sizing, and material type to columns A, B, C, and D, respectively, in
Table 8.15. Gain, screen angle, and screen vibration level would be assigned to columns E, F,
and G, respectively. If we are correct and the “minor variables” E, F, and G are negligible, we
will be left with a full 24 design in the key process variables.
8.4.3
Blocking Fractional Factorials
Occasionally, a fractional factorial design requires so many runs that all of them cannot be
made under homogeneous conditions. In these situations, fractional factorials may be con-
founded in blocks. Appendix Table X contains recommended blocking arrangements for
many of the fractional factorial designs in Table 8.14. The minimum block size for these
designs is eight runs.
To illustrate the general procedure, consider the 
fractional factorial design with the
dening relation I ABCE BCDF ADEF shown in Table 8.10. This fractional design
contains 16 treatment combinations. Suppose we wish to run the design in two blocks of eight
treatment combinations each. In selecting an interaction to confound with blocks, we note
from examining the alias structure in Appendix Table X(f) that there are two alias sets involv-
ing only three-factor interactions. The table suggests selecting ABD (and its aliases) to be con-
founded with blocks. This would give the two blocks shown in Figure 8.18. Notice that the
262
IV
Block 1
Block 2
(1)
ae
abf
acf
cef
bef
abce
bc
adef
df
bde
abd
acd
cde
bcdf
abcdef
■F I G U R E 8 . 1 8
The 
design 
in two blocks with ABD confounded
262
IV
