Thus, design C minimizes the number of words in the dening relation that are of minimum
length. We call such a design a minimum aberration design. Minimizing aberration in a
design of resolution R ensures that the design has the minimum number of main effects
aliased with interactions of order R 1, the minimum number of two-factor interactions
aliased with interactions of order R 2, and so forth. Refer to Fries and Hunter (1980) for
more details.
Table 8.14 presents a selection of 2kp fractional factorial designs for k 15 factors and
up to n 128 runs. The suggested generators in this table will result in a design of the high-
est possible resolution. These are also the minimum aberration designs.
The alias relationships for all of the designs in Table 8.14 for which n 64 are given
in Appendix Table X(a–w). The alias relationships presented in this table focus on main
effects and two- and three-factor interactions. The complete dening relation is given for each
design. This appendix table makes it very easy to select a design of sufcient resolution to
ensure that any interactions of potential interest can be estimated.
8.4 The General 2kp Fractional Factorial Design
341
■T A B L E 8 . 1 3
Three Choices of Generators for the 
Design
Design A Generators:
Design B Generators:
Design C Generators:
F ABC, G BCD
F ABC, G ADE
F ABCD, G ABDE
I ABCF BCDG ADFG
I ABCF ADEG BCDEFG
I ABCDF ABDEG CEFG
Aliases (two-factor interactions)
Aliases (two-factor interactions)
Aliases (two-factor interactions)
AB  CF
AB CF
CE FG
AC BF
AC BF
CF EG
AD FG
AD EG
CG EF
AG DF
AE DG
BD CG
AF BC
BG CD
AG DE
AF BC DG
272
IV
E X A M P L E 8 . 5
To illustrate the use of Table 8.14, suppose that we have seven
factors and that we are interested in estimating the seven main
effects and getting some insight regarding the two-factor
interactions. We are willing to assume that three-factor and
higher interactions are negligible. This information suggests
that a resolution IV design would be appropriate.
Table 8.14 shows that there are two resolution IV frac-
tions available: the 
with 32 runs and the 
with 
16 runs. Appendix Table X contains the complete alias rela-
tionships for these two designs. The aliases for the 
16-run design are in Appendix Table X(i). Notice that all
seven main effects are aliased with three-factor interac-
tions. The two-factor interactions are all aliased in groups
of three. Therefore, this design will satisfy our objectives;
that is, it will allow the estimation of the main effects, and
273
IV
273
IV
272
IV
it will give some insight regarding two-factor interactions.
It is not necessary to run the 
design, which would
require 32 runs. Appendix Table X(j) shows that this design
would allow the estimation of all seven main effects and
that 15 of the 21 two-factor interactions could also be
uniquely estimated. (Recall that three-factor and higher
interactions are negligible.) This is probably more informa-
tion about interactions than is necessary. The complete 
design is shown in Table 8.15. Notice that it was construct-
ed by starting with the 16-run 24 design in A, B, C, and D
as the basic design and then adding the three columns E 
ABC, F BCD, and G ACD. The generators are I 
ABCE, I BCDF, and I ACDG (Table 8.14). The com-
plete defining relation is I ABCE BCDF ADEF 
ACDG BDEG CEFG ABFG.
2IV
73
272
IV
(Continued on p. 343)
