306
Chapter 7 ■Blocking and Confounding in the 2k Factorial Design
7.3
Confounding in the 2k Factorial Design
In many problems it is impossible to perform a complete replicate of a factorial design in one
block. Confounding is a design technique for arranging a complete factorial experiment in
blocks, where the block size is smaller than the number of treatment combinations in one
replicate. The technique causes information about certain treatment effects (usually high-
order interactions) to be indistinguishable from, or confounded with, blocks. In this chap-
ter we concentrate on confounding systems for the 2k factorial design. Note that even though
the designs presented are incomplete block designs because each block does not contain all
the treatments or treatment combinations, the special structure of the 2k factorial system
allows a simplied method of analysis.
We consider the construction and analysis of the 2k factorial design in 2p incomplete
blocks, where p k. Consequently, these designs can be run in two blocks (p 1), four
blocks ( p 2), eight blocks ( p 3), and so on.
7.4
Confounding the 2k Factorial Design in Two Blocks
Suppose that we wish to run a single replicate of the 22 design. Each of the 22 4 treatment
combinations requires a quantity of raw material, for example, and each batch of raw materi-
al is only large enough for two treatment combinations to be tested. Thus, two batches of raw
material are required. If batches of raw material are considered as blocks, then we must assign
two of the four treatment combinations to each block.
Figure 7.1 shows one possible design for this problem. The geometric view, Figure
7.1a, indicates that treatment combinations on opposing diagonals are assigned to different
blocks. Notice from Figure 7.1b that block 1 contains the treatment combinations (1) and ab
and that block 2 contains a and b. Of course, the order in which the treatment combinations
are run within a block is randomly determined. We would also randomly decide which block
to run rst. Suppose we estimate the main effects of A and B just as if no blocking had
occurred. From Equations 6.1 and 6.2, we obtain
Note that both A and B are unaffected by blocking because in each estimate there is one plus
and one minus treatment combination from each block. That is, any difference between block
1 and block 2 will cancel out.
B 
1
2[ab b a (1)]
A 
1
2[ab a b (1)]
–
–
–
+
+
(a) Geometric view
(b) Assignment of the four
runs to two blocks
= Run in block 1
Block 1
Block 2
= Run in block 2
A
B
(1)
ab
a
b
■F I G U R E 7 . 1
A 22 design in two blocks
