ConţüŁrmation Experiments. Adding the alternate fraction to the principal fraction
may be thought of as a type of con´Čürmation experiment in that it provides information that
will allow us to strengthen our initial conclusions about the two-factor interaction effects. We
will investigate some other aspects of combining fractional factorials to isolate interactions in
Sections 8.5 and 8.6.
A conţüęrmation experiment need not be this elaborate. A very simple conţüęrmation exper-
iment is to use the model equation to predict the response at a point of interest in the design
space (this should not be one of the runs in the current design) and then actually run that treat-
ment combination (perhaps several times), comparing the predicted and observed responses.
Reasonably close agreement indicates that the interpretation of the fractional factorial was
correct, whereas serious discrepancies mean that the interpretation was problematic. This
would be an indication that additional experimentation is required to resolve ambiguities.
To illustrate, consider the 24ţÇÇ1 fractional factorial in Example 8.1. The experimenters
are interested in ţüęnding a set of conditions where the response variable ţüęltration rate is high,
but low concentrations of formaldehyde (factor C) are desirable. This would suggest that fac-
tors A and D should be at the high level and factor C should be at the low level. Examining
Figure 8.3, we note that when B is at the low level, this treatment combination was run in the
fractional factorial, producing an observed response of 100. The treatment combination with
B at the high level was not in the original fraction, so this would be a reasonable conţüęrmation
run. With A, B, and D at the high level and C at the low level, we use the model equation from
Example 8.1 to calculate the predicted response as follows:
The observed response at this treatment combination is 104 (refer to Figure 6.10 where the
response data for the complete 24 factorial design are presented). Since the observed and pre-
dicted values of ţüęltration rate are very similar, we have a successful conţüęrmation run. This is
additional evidence that our interpretation of the fractional factorial was correct.
There will be situations where the predicted and observed values in a conţüęrmation
experiment will not be this close together, and it will be necessary to answer the question of
whether the two values are sufţüęciently close to reasonably conclude that the interpretation of
the fractional design was correct. One way to answer this question is to construct a predic-
tion interval on the future observation for the conţüęrmation run and then see if the actual
observation falls inside the prediction interval. We show how to do this using this example in
Section 10.6, where prediction intervals for a regression model are introduced.
8.3
The One-Quarter Fraction of the 2k Design
For a moderately large number of factors, smaller fractions of the 2k design are frequently
useful. Consider a one-quarter fraction of the 2k design. This design contains 2kţÇÇ2 runs and is
usually called a 2kţÇÇ2 fractional factorial.
The 2kţÇé2 design may be constructed by ţüęrst writing down a basic design consisting of the
runs associated with a full factorial in k ţÇÇ2 factors and then associating the two additional
columns with appropriately chosen interactions involving the ţüęrst k ţÇÇ2 factors. Thus, a 
ţÇâ100.25
ţÇäţÇâ
19.00
2 ţÇä(1)(1)
ţÇâ70.75 ţÇäţÇâ
19.00
2 ţÇä(1) ţÇäţÇâ
14.00
2 ţÇä(ţÇÇ1) ţÇäţÇâ
16.50
2 ţÇä(1) ţÇäţÇâ
ţÇÇ18.50
2 ţÇä(1)(ţÇÇ1)
y╦ć ţÇâ70.75 ţÇäţÇâ
19.00
2 ţÇäx1 ţÇäţÇâ
14.00
2 ţÇäx3 ţÇäţÇâ
16.50
2 ţÇäx4 ţÇäţÇâ
ţÇÇ18.50
2 ţÇäx1x3 ţÇäţÇâ
19.00
2 ţÇäx1x4
8.3 The One-Quarter Fraction of the 2k Design
333
