Notice that there are 12 degrees of freedom available to estimate two-factor interactions,
exactly as in the complete fold over. Furthermore, AB is no longer aliased with CE. The half-
normal plot of the effects from the partial fold over is shown in Figure 8.27. As in the com-
plete fold over, CE is identied as the signicant two-factor interaction.
The partial fold-over technique is very useful with resolution IV designs and usually leads
to an efcient use of experimental resources. Resolution IV designs always provide good esti-
mates of main effects (assuming that three-factor interactions are negligible), and usually the
number of possible two-factor interaction that need to be de-aliased is not large. A partial fold
over of a resolution IV design will usually support estimation of as many two-factor interactions
as a full fold over. One disadvantage of the partial fold over is that it is not orthogonal. This caus-
es parameter estimates to be correlated and leads to ination in the standard errors of the effects
or regression model coefcients. For example, in the partial fold over of the spin coater experi-
ment, the standard errors of the regression model coefcients range from 0.20to 0.25, while
in the complete fold over, which is orthogonal, the standard errors of the model coefcients are
0.18. For more information on partial fold overs, see Mee and Peralta (2000) and the supple-
mental material for this chapter.
8.7.3
Resolution V Designs
Resolution V designs are fractional factorials in which the main effects and the two-factor
interactions do not have other main effects and two-factor interactions as their aliases.
Consequently, these are very powerful designs, allowing unique estimation of all main effects
and two-factor interactions, provided of course that all interactions involving three or more fac-
tors are negligible. The shortest word in the dening relation of a resolution V design must
have ve letters. The 251 design with I ABCDE is perhaps the most widely used resolution
8.7 Resolution IV and V Designs
373
05
10
20
30
50
70
80
90
0.00
39.53
79.06
|Effect|
118.59
158.13
95
99
Half-normal % probability
C
E
CE
B
A
■F I G U R E 8 . 2 7
Half-normal
plot of effects from the partial fold
over of the spin coater experiment
in Table 8.33
