associated with them. Now every treatment combination will yield a particular pair of values
of L1 (mod 2) and L2 (mod 2), that is, either (L1, L2) (0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), or (1, 1). Treatment
combinations yielding the same values of (L1, L2) are assigned to the same block. In our
example we nd
These treatment combinations would be assigned to different blocks. The complete design is
as shown in Figure 7.6.
With a little reflection we realize that another effect in addition to ADE and BCE
must be confounded with blocks. Because there are four blocks with three degrees of
freedom between them, and because ADE and BCE have only one degree of freedom
each, clearly an additional effect with one degree of freedom must be confounded. This
effect is the generalized interaction of ADE and BCE, which is defined as the product
of ADE and BCE modulus 2. Thus, in our example the generalized interaction
(ADE)(BCE) ABCDE2 ABCD is also confounded with blocks. It is easy to verify
this by referring to a table of plus and minus signs for the 25 design, such as in Davies
(1956). Inspection of such a table reveals that the treatment combinations are assigned to
the blocks as follows:
Treatment Combinations in
Sign on ADE
Sign on BCE
Sign on ABCD
Block 1



Block 2



Block 3



Block 4



Notice that the product of signs of any two effects for a particular block (e.g., ADE and BCE)
yields the sign of the other effect for that block (in this case, ABCD). Thus, ADE, BCE, and
ABCD are all confounded with blocks.
The group-theoretic properties of the principal block mentioned in Section 7.4 still
hold. For example, we see that the product of two treatment combinations in the principal
block yields another element of the principal block. That is,
ad ! bc abcd and abe ! bde ab2de2 ad
L1 1, L2 1 for e, ade, bce, abcde, ab, bd, ac, cd
L1 0, L2 1 for b, abd, c, acd, ae, de abce, bcde
L1 1, L2 0 for a, d, abc, bcd, be, abde, ce, acde
L1 0, L2 0 for (1), ad, bc, abcd, abe, ace, cde, bde
314
Chapter 7 ■Blocking and Confounding in the 2k Factorial Design
■F I G U R E 7 . 6
The 25 design in 
four blocks with ADE, BCE, and ABCD
confounded
