It is easy to verify that this design is also of resolution III; in fact, it is a 
, or a one-
eighth fraction, of the 26 design. The dening relation for the 
design is equal to the den-
ing relation for the original 
design with any words containing the letter G deleted. Thus,
the dening relation for our new design is
In general, when d factors are dropped to produce a new design, the new dening relation is
obtained as those words in the original dening relation that do not contain any dropped let-
ters. When constructing designs by this method, care should be exercised to obtain the best
arrangement possible. If we drop columns B, D, F, and G from Table 8.19, we obtain a design
for three factors in eight runs, yet the treatment combinations correspond to two replicates of
a 231 design. The experimenter would probably prefer to run a full 23 design in A, C, and E.
It is also possible to obtain a resolution III design for studying up to 15 factors in 16
runs. This saturated 
design can be generated by rst writing down the 16 treatment
combinations associated with a 24 design in A, B, C, and D and then equating 11 new factors
with the two-, three-, and four-factor interactions of the original four. In this design, each of
the 15 main effects is aliased with seven two-factor interactions. A similar procedure can be
used for the 
design, which allows up to 31 factors to be studied in 32 runs.
8.6.2
Fold Over of Resolution III Fractions to Separate
Aliased Effects
By combining fractional factorial designs in which certain signs are switched, we can system-
atically isolate effects of potential interest. This type of sequential experiment is called a fold
over of the original design. The alias structure for any fraction with the signs for one or more
factors reversed is obtained by making changes of sign on the appropriate factors in the alias
structure of the original fraction.
Consider the 
design in Table 8.19. Suppose that along with this principal fraction
a second fractional design with the signs reversed in the column for factor D is also run. That
is, the column for D in the second fraction is
The effects that may be estimated from the rst fraction are shown in Equation 8.2, and from
the second fraction we obtain
(8.3)
 [G]l G CD BE AF
 [F]l F BC AG DE
 [E]l E AC BG DF
 [D]l D AB CG EF
 [D]l D AB CG EF
 [C]l C AE BF DG
 [B]l B AD CF EG
 [A]l A BD CE FG

274
III
23126
III
21511
III
I ABD ACE BCF BCDE ACDF ABEF DEF
274
III
263
III
263
III
8.6 Resolution III Designs
353
