6.8 The Addition of Center Points to the 2k Design
285
The second graph is a fraction of design space (FDS) plot, which shows the unscaled
prediction variance on the vertical scale and the fraction of design space on the horizontal
scale. This graph also has an adjustable crosshair that is shown at the 50 percent point on the
fraction of design space scale. The crosshairs indicate that the unscaled prediction variance
will be at most 0.425 2 (remember that the unscaled prediction variance divides by 2, that’s
why the point on the vertical scale is 0.425) over a region that covers 50 percent of the design
region. Therefore, an FDS plot gives a simple display of how the prediction variance is dis-
tributed throughout the design region. An ideal FDS plot would be at with a small value of
the unscaled prediction variance. FDS plots are an ideal way to compare designs in terms of
their potential prediction performance.
The nal display in the JMP output is a surface plot of the unscaled prediction variance.
The contours of constant prediction variance for the 22 are circular; that is, all points in the
design space that are at the same distance from the center of the design have the same predic-
tion variance.
6.8
The Addition of Center Points to the 2k Design
A potential concern in the use of two-level factorial designs is the assumption of linearity in
the factor effects. Of course, perfect linearity is unnecessary, and the 2k system will work
quite well even when the linearity assumption holds only very approximately. In fact, we have
noted that if interaction terms are added to a main effect or rst-order model, resulting in
(6.28)
then we have a model capable of representing some curvature in the response function. This cur-
vature, of course, results from the twisting of the plane induced by the interaction terms ijxixj.
In some situations, the curvature in the response function will not be adequately mod-
eled by Equation 6.28. In such cases, a logical model to consider is
(6.29)
where the jj represent pure second-order or quadratic effects. Equation 6.29 is called a
second-order response surface model.
In running a two-level factorial experiment, we usually anticipate tting the rst-order
model in Equation 6.28, but we should be alert to the possibility that the second-order model
in Equation 6.29 is more appropriate. There is a method of replicating certain points in a 2k
factorial that will provide protection against curvature from second-order effects as well as
allow an independent estimate of error to be obtained. The method consists of adding center
points to the 2k design. These consist of nC replicates run at the points xi  0 (i  1, 2, . . . , k).
One important reason for adding the replicate runs at the design center is that center points
do not affect the usual effect estimates in a 2k design. When we add center points, we assume
that the k factors are quantitative.
To illustrate the approach, consider a 22 design with one observation at each of the
factorial points (, ), (, ), (, ), and (, ) and nC observations at the center point
(0, 0). Figures 6.37 and 6.38 illustrate the situation. Let 
be the average of the four runs at
the four factorial points, and 
be the average of the nC runs at the center point. If the differ-
ence 
is small, then the center points lie on or near the plane passing through the
factorial points, and there is no quadratic curvature. On the other hand, if 
is large,
yF yC
yF yC
yC
yF
y 0 
k
j1
jxj 
i!j
ijxixj 
k
j1
jjx2
j 
y 0 
k
j1
jxj 
i!j
ijxixj 
