7.4 Confounding the 2k Factorial Design in Two Blocks
309
Note that
Treatment combinations in the other block (or blocks) may be generated by multiplying one
element in the new block by each element in the principal block modulus 2. For the 23 with
ABC confounded, because the principal block is (1), ab, ac, and bc, we know that b is in the
other block. Thus, the elements of this second block are
This agrees with the results obtained previously.
Estimation of Error. When the number of variables is small, say k 2 or 3, it is usu-
ally necessary to replicate the experiment to obtain an estimate of error. For example, suppose
that a 23 factorial must be run in two blocks with ABC confounded, and the experimenter
decides to replicate the design four times. The resulting design might appear as in Figure 7.3.
Note that ABC is confounded in each replicate.
The analysis of variance for this design is shown in Table 7.5. There are 32 observa-
tions and 31 total degrees of freedom. Furthermore, because there are eight blocks, seven
degrees of freedom must be associated with these blocks. One breakdown of those seven
degrees of freedom is shown in Table 7.5. The error sum of squares actually consists of the
interactions between replicates and each of the effects (A, B, C, AB, AC, BC). It is usually
safe to consider these interactions to be zero and to treat the resulting mean square as an esti-
mate of error. Main effects and two-factor interactions are tested against the mean square
error. Cochran and Cox (1957) observe that the block or ABC mean square could be com-
pared to the error for the ABC mean square, which is really replicates blocks. This test is
usually very insensitive.
If resources are sufcient to allow the replication of confounded designs, it is generally
better to use a slightly different method of designing the blocks in each replicate. This approach
consists of confounding a different effect in each replicate so that some information on all effects
is obtained. Such a procedure is called partial confounding and is discussed in Section 7.8.
If k is moderately large, say k 4, we can frequently afford only a single replicate. The
experimenter usually assumes higher order interactions to be negligible and combines their sums
of squares as error. The normal probability plot of factor effects can be very helpful in this regard.
b ! bc b2c c
b ! ac
abc
b ! ab ab2 a
b ! (1) 
 b
ac ! bc abc2 ab
ab ! bc ab2c ac
ab ! ac a2bc bc
■F I G U R E 7 . 3
Four replicates of the 23 design with ABC confounded
