7.7 Confounding the 2k Factorial Design in 2 p Blocks
315
and so forth. To construct another block, select a treatment combination that is not in the prin-
cipal block (e.g., b) and multiply b by all the treatment combinations in the principal block.
This yields
and so forth, which will produce the eight treatment combinations in block 3. In practice, the
principal block can be obtained from the dening contrasts and the group-theoretic property,
and the remaining blocks can be determined from these treatment combinations by the method
shown above.
The general procedure for constructing a 2k design confounded in four blocks is to
choose two effects to generate the blocks, automatically confounding a third effect that is the
generalized interaction of the rst two. Then, the design is constructed by using the two den-
ing contrasts (L1, L2) and the group-theoretic properties of the principal block. In selecting
effects to be confounded with blocks, care must be exercised to obtain a design that does not
confound effects that may be of interest. For example, in a 25 design we might choose to con-
found ABCDE and ABD, which automatically confounds CE, an effect that is probably of
interest. A better choice is to confound ADE and BCE, which automatically confounds ABCD.
It is preferable to sacrice information on the three-factor interactions ADE and BCE instead
of the two-factor interaction CE.
7.7
Confounding the 2k Factorial Design in 2 p Blocks
The methods described above may be extended to the construction of a 2k factorial design
confounded in 2p blocks ( p k), where each block contains exactly 2kp runs. We select p
independent effects to be confounded, where by “independent” we mean that no effect cho-
sen is the generalized interaction of the others. The blocks may be generated by use of the p
dening contrasts L1, L2, . . . , Lp associated with these effects. In addition, exactly 2p p 
1 other effects will be confounded with blocks, these being the generalized interactions of
those p independent effects initially chosen. Care should be exercised in selecting effects to
be confounded so that information on effects that may be of potential interest is not sacriced.
The statistical analysis of these designs is straightforward. Sums of squares for all the
effects are computed as if no blocking had occurred. Then, the block sum of squares is found
by adding the sums of squares for all the effects confounded with blocks.
Obviously, the choice of the p effects used to generate the block is critical because the
confounding structure of the design directly depends on them. Table 7.9 presents a list of use-
ful designs. To illustrate the use of this table, suppose we wish to construct a 26 design con-
founded in 23 8 blocks of 23 8 runs each. Table 7.9 indicates that we would choose
ABEF, ABCD, and ACE as the p 3 independent effects to generate the blocks. The remain-
ing 2p p 1 23 3 1 4 effects that are confounded are the generalized interactions
of these three; that is,
The reader is asked to generate the eight blocks for this design in Problem 7.11.
 (ABEF)(ABCD)(ACE) A3B2C 2DE 2F ADF
 (ABCD)(ACE) A2BC 2ED BDE
 (ABEF)(ACE) A2BCE 2F BCF
 (ABEF)(ABCD) A2B2CDEF CDEF
b ! (1) b b ! ad abd b ! bc b2c c b ! abcd ab2cd acd
