Plackett–Burman designs are examples of nonregular designs. This term appears
frequently in the experimental design literature. Basically, a regular design is one in which
all effects can be estimated independently of the other effects and in the case of a fractional
factorial, the effects that cannot be estimated are completely aliased with the other effects.
Obviously, a full factorial such as the 2k is a regular design, and so are the 2kp fractional fac-
torials because while all of the effects cannot be estimated the “constants” in the alias chains
for these designs are always either zero or plus or minus unity. That is, the effects that are not
estimable because of the fractionation are completely aliased (some say completely con-
founded) with the effects that can be estimated. In nonregular designs, because some of the
nonzero constants in the alias chains are not equal to 1, there is always at least a chance that
some information on the aliased effects may be available.
The projection properties of the nongeometric Plackett–Burman designs are interesting, and
in many cases, useful. For example, consider the 12-run design in Table 8.24. This design will proj-
ect into three replicates of a full 22 design in any two of the original 11 factors. In three factors, the
projected design is a full 23 factorial plus a 
fractional factorial (see Figure 8.24a). All
Plackett–Burman designs will project into a full factorial plus some additional runs in any three
factors. Thus, the resolution III Plackett–Burman design has projectivity 3, meaning it will col-
lapse into a full factorial in any subset of three factors (actually, some of the larger
Plackett–Burman designs, such as those with 68, 72, 80, and 84 runs, have projectivity 4). In con-
trast, the 
design only has projectivity 2. The four-dimensional projections of the 12- run
design are shown in Figure 8.24b. Notice that there are 11 distinct runs. This design can t all four
of the main effects and all 6 two-factor interactions, assuming that all other main effects and inter-
actions are negligible. The design in Fig. 8.24b needs 5 additional runs to form a complete 24 (with
one additional run) and only a single run to form a 241 (with 5 additional runs). Regression meth-
ods can be used to t models involving main effects and interactions using those projected designs.
2kp
III
231
III
8.6 Resolution III Designs
359
(a) Projection into three factors
(b) Projection into four factors
–
+
■F I G U R E 8 . 2 4
Projection of the 12-run Plackett–
Burman design into three- and four-factor designs
