of runs (rows), but it is missing one column. The generator I ΌΑΔABC ΌΑδΌΑδΌΑδK is then solved for
the missing column (K) so that K ΌΑΔABC ΌΑδΌΑδΌΑδ(K ΌΑΑ1) deΌΒσnes the product of plus and minus
signs to use in each row to produce the levels for the kth factor.
Note that any interaction effect could be used to generate the column for the kth factor.
However, using any effect other than ABC ΌΑδΌΑδΌΑδ(K ΌΑΑ1) will not produce a design of the high-
est possible resolution.
Another way to view the construction of a one-half fraction is to partition the runs into
two blocks with the highest order interaction ABC ΌΑδΌΑδΌΑδK confounded. Each block is a 2kΌΑΑ1
fractional factorial design of the highest resolution.
Projection of Fractions into Factorials. Any fractional factorial design of resolu-
tion R contains complete factorial designs (possibly replicated factorials) in any subset of 
R ΌΑΑ1 factors. This is an important and useful concept. For example, if an experimenter has
several factors of potential interest but believes that only R ΌΑΑ1 of them have important
effects, then a fractional factorial design of resolution R is the appropriate choice of design.
If the experimenter is correct, the fractional factorial design of resolution R will project into
a full factorial in the R ΌΑΑ1 signiΌΒσcant factors. This property is illustrated in Figure 8.2 for the
design, which projects into a 22 design in every subset of two factors.
Because the maximum possible resolution of a one-half fraction of the 2k design is 
R ΌΑΔk, every 2kΌΑΑ1 design will project into a full factorial in any (k ΌΑΑ1) of the original k factors.
Furthermore, a 2kΌΑΑ1 design may be projected into two replicates of a full factorial in any subset
of k ΌΑΑ2 factors, four replicates of a full factorial in any subset of k ΌΑΑ3 factors, and so on.
23ΌΑΑ1
III
8.2 The One-Half Fraction of the 2k Design
325
C
A
b
c
a
B
abc
έΨιF I G U R E 8 . 2
Projection of a 
design into three 22 designs
23ΌΑΑ1
III
E X A M P L E 8 . 1
Consider the ΌΒσltration rate experiment in Example 6.2. The
original design, shown in Table 6.10, is a single replicate of
the 24 design. In that example, we found that the main
effects A, C, and D and the interactions AC and AD were
different from zero. We will now return to this experiment
and simulate what would have happened if a half-fraction
of the 24 design had been run instead of the full factorial.
We will use the 24ΌΑΑ1 design with I ΌΑΔABCD, because
this choice of generator will result in a design of the high-
est possible resolution (IV). To construct the design, we
ΌΒσrst write down the basic design, which is a 23 design, as
shown in the ΌΒσrst three columns of Table 8.3. This basic
design has the necessary number of runs (eight) but only
three columns (factors). To ΌΒσnd the fourth factor levels,
solve I ΌΑΔABCD for D, or D ΌΑΔABC. Thus, the level of D
in each run is the product of the plus and minus signs in
columns A, B, and C. The process is illustrated in Table 8.3.
Because the generator ABCD is positive, this
design is
the principal fraction. The design is shown graphically in
Figure 8.3.
Using the deΌΒσning relation, we note that each main
effect is aliased with a three-factor interaction; that is,
A ΌΑΔA2BCD ΌΑΔBCD, B ΌΑΔAB2CD ΌΑΔACD, C ΌΑΔABC2D ΌΑΔ
ABD, and D ΌΑΔABCD2 ΌΑΔABC. Furthermore, every two-factor
24ΌΑΑ1
IV
