472
Chapter 10 έΨιFitting Regression Models
points. Generally, a large difference between the ordinary residual and the PRESS residuals
will indicate a point where the model ΌΒσts the data well, but a model built without that point
predicts poorly. In the next section we will discuss some other measures of inΌΒςuence.
Finally, we note that PRESS can be used to compute an approximate R2 for prediction,
say
(10.51)
This statistic gives some indication of the predictive capability of the regression model. For
the viscosity regression model from Example 10.1, we can compute the PRESS residuals
using the ordinary residuals and the values of hii found in Table 10.3. The corresponding value
of the PRESS statistic is PRESS ΌΑΔ5207.7. Then
Therefore, we could expect this model to έΑεexplainέΑζ about 89 percent of the variability in pre-
dicting new observations, as compared to the approximately 93 percent of the variability in
the original data explained by the least squares ΌΒσt. The overall predictive capability of the
model based on this criterion seems very satisfactory.
R-Student. The studentized residual ri discussed above is often considered an outlier
diagnostic. It is customary to use MSE as an estimate of ΌΑΑ2 in computing ri. This is referred
to as internal scaling of the residual because MSE is an internally generated estimate of ΌΑΑ2
obtained from ΌΒσtting the model to all n observations. Another approach would be to use an
estimate of ΌΑΑ2 based on a data set with the ith observation removed. We denote the estimate
of ΌΑΑ2 so obtained by 
. We can show that
(10.52)
The estimate of ΌΑΑ2 in Equation 10.52 is used instead of MSE to produce an externally studen-
tized residual, usually called R-student, given by
(10.53)
In many situations, ti will differ little from the studentized residual ri. However, if the ith
observation is inΌΒςuential, then 
can differ signiΌΒσcantly from MSE, and thus the R-student will
be more sensitive to this point. Furthermore, under the standard assumptions, ti has a tnΌΑΑpΌΑΑ1
distribution. Thus R-student offers a more formal procedure for outlier detection via hypoth-
esis testing. Table 10.3 displays the values of R-student for the viscosity regression model in
Example 10.1. None of those values are unusually large.
10.7.2
InΎυΓuence Diagnostics
We occasionally find that a small subset of the data exerts a disproportionate influence on
the fitted regression model. That is, parameter estimates or predictions may depend more
on the influential subset than on the majority of the data. We would like to locate these
influential points and assess their impact on the model. If these influential points are έΑεbadέΑζ
values, they should be eliminated. On the contrary, there may be nothing wrong with these
points. But if they control key model properties, we would like to know it because it could
S2
(i)
ti ΌΑΔ
ei
ΌΑΖS2
(i)(1 ΌΑΑhii)
 
 i ΌΑΔ1, 2, . . . , n
S2
(i) ΌΑΔ(n ΌΑΑp)MSE ΌΑΑe2
i/(1 ΌΑΑhii)
n ΌΑΑp ΌΑΑ1
S2
(i)
ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΑ5207.7
47,635.9 ΌΑΔ0.8907
R2
Prediction ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΑPRESS
SST
R2
Prediction ΌΑΔ1 ΌΑΑPRESS
SST
