is impossible to experiment in some portions of the factor space (such as tempera-
tures and pressures that are simultaneously beyond certain boundaries leading to
unsafe operating conditions) or there are infeasible combinations of some factors.
An example of an optimal design for a problem with a constrained region will be
given in Chapter 11.
3. The experimenter needs to t a nonstandard model. Models containing a mix of
factors of different types. For example, suppose that the experimenter is interested
in tting a full quadratic model in two variables x1 and x2, but there is a third two-
level categorical factor z that is also of interest. The model that the experimenter
wants to entertain is 
This is a full quadratic model in the two continuous factors and it also contains the main effect
of the categorical factor plus all interactions between the categorical factor and the linear,
interaction, and pure quadratic effects of the continuous factors.  If this full 12-parameter
model is the nal model for the experiment, then the model describes two completely differ-
ent response functions at the two different levels of the categorical factor. Assuming that the
experimenter can only conduct 15 runs, there is not a standard response surface design for this
problem. The closest standard design that would work for this problem would be the 3 3
2 factorial, which requires 18 runs.
Designing experiments for these types of problems requires a different approach. We
can’t look in the textbook or course notes and try to match the designs we nd there to the
problem. Instead we need to create a custom design that ts our specic problem. Creating
this custom design requires:
1. Information about the problem—specically the model that the experimenter wants
to entertain, the region of interest, the number of runs that can be performed, and
any requirements about blocking, covariates, etc.
2. Choosing an optimality criterion—that is, a criterion for selecting the design
points to be run. In the next section we will give a brief review of optimality crite-
rion for design experiments.
3. A software package to construct the design. Sometimes optimal designs are called
computer-generated designs. Several standard software packages do a good job of
nding optimal designs.
It is always better to create a custom design for the actual problem that you want to
solve than to force your problem to t a standard design. Fortunately, it has been relatively
easy to construct optimal design for about the last 15 years. The early research work on the
theory of design optimality began with Kiefer (1959, 1961) and Kiefer and Wolfowitz (1959).
The rst practical algorithm for construction of optimal designs was developed by Mitchell
(1974). This was a point exchange method, in which runs from a candidate set of all possible
runs that the experimenter would consider running were systematically exchanged with the
runs in a current design until no further improvement in the optimality criterion could be
achieved. Several variations of the point exchange approach were developed and implement-
ed over the next 20 years. Meyer and Nachtsheim (1995) developed a coordinate exchange
algorithm in which individual design coordinates were systematically searched to nd the
optimal settings. No candidate set of runs was required. This approach quickly became the
standard one and today almost all efcient optimal design software makes use of the coordi-
nate exchange approach.
12zx1x2 11zx2
1 22zx2
2 
y 0 1x1 2x2 12x1x2 11x2
1 22x2
2 yz 1zx1 2zx2
432
Chapter 9 ■Additional Design and Analysis Topics for Factorial and Fractional Factorial Designs
