10.8 Testing for Lack of Fit
473
affect the use of the model. In this section we describe and illustrate some useful measures
of influence.
Leverage Points. The disposition of points in x space is important in determining
model properties. In particular, remote observations potentially have disproportionate lever-
age on the parameter estimates, predicted values, and the usual summary statistics.
The hat matrix H X(XX)1Xis very useful in identifying inuential observations.
As noted earlier, H determines the variances and covariances of and e because V( ) 2H
and V(e) 2(I H). The elements hij of H may be interpreted as the amount of leverage
exerted by yj on
i. Thus, inspection of the elements of H can reveal points that are potentially
inuential by virtue of their location in x space. Attention is usually focused on the diagonal
elements hii. Because 
hii rank(H) rank(X) p, the average size of the diagonal ele-
ment of the H matrix is p/n. As a rough guideline, then, if a diagonal element hii is greater
than 2p/n, observation i is a high-leverage point. To apply this to the viscosity model in
Example 10.1, note that 2p/n 2(3)/16 0.375. Table 10.3 gives the hat diagonals hii for the
rst-order model; because none of the hii exceeds 0.375, we would conclude that there are no
leverage points in these data.
Inuence on Regression Coefcients. The hat diagonals will identify points that are
potentially inuential due to their location in x space. It is desirable to consider both the loca-
tion of the point and the response variable in measuring inuence. Cook (1977, 1979) has
suggested using a measure of the squared distance between the least squares estimate based
on all n points
and the estimate obtained by deleting the i point, say 
. This distance meas-
ure can be expressed as
(10.54)
A reasonable cutoff for Di is unity. That is, we usually consider observations for which Di  1
to be inuential.
The Di statistic is actually calculated from
(10.55)
Note that, apart from the constant p, Di is the product of the square of the ith studentized
residual and hii/(1 hii). This ratio can be shown to be the distance from the vector xi to the
centroid of the remaining data. Thus, Di is made up of a component that reects how well 
the model ts the ith observation yi and a component that measures how far that point is from
the rest of the data. Either component (or both) may contribute to a large value of Di.
Table 10.3 presents the values of Di for the regression model t to the viscosity data in
Example 10.1. None of these values of Di exceeds 1, so there is no strong evidence of inu-
ential observations in these data.
10.8
Testing for Lack of Fit
In Section 6.8 we showed how adding center points to a 2k factorial design allows the exper-
imenter to obtain an estimate of pure experimental error. This allows the partitioning of the
residual sum of squares SSE into two components; that is
where SSPE is the sum of squares due to pure error and SSLOF is the sum of squares due to lack
of t.
SSE SSPE SSLOF
Di r 2
i
p
V[yˆ(xi)]
V(ei)
r 2
i
p
hii
(1 hii) 
 i 1, 2, . . . , n
D1 (&ˆ
(i) &ˆ)XX(&ˆ
(i) &ˆ)
pMSE
 
 i 1, 2, . . . , n
&ˆ
(i)
&ˆ
n
i1
yˆ
yˆ
yˆ
