RSM is a sequential procedure. Often, when we are at a point on the response surface
that is remote from the optimum, such as the current operating conditions in Figure 11.3,
there is little curvature in the system and the first-order model will be appropriate. Our
objective here is to lead the experimenter rapidly and efciently along a path of improvement
toward the general vicinity of the optimum. Once the region of the optimum has been found,
a more elaborate model, such as the second-order model, may be employed, and an analysis
may be performed to locate the optimum. From Figure 11.3, we see that the analysis of a
response surface can be thought of as “climbing a hill,” where the top of the hill represents
the point of maximum response. If the true optimum is a point of minimum response, then we
may think of “descending into a valley.”
The eventual objective of RSM is to determine the optimum operating conditions for
the system or to determine a region of the factor space in which operating requirements are
satised. More extensive presentations of RSM are in Khuri and Cornell (1996), Myers,
Montgomery and Anderson-Cook (2009), and Box and Draper (2007). The review paper by
Myers et al. (2004) is also a useful reference.
11.2
The Method of Steepest Ascent
Frequently, the initial estimate of the optimum operating conditions for the system will be far
from the actual optimum. In such circumstances, the objective of the experimenter is to move
rapidly to the general vicinity of the optimum. We wish to use a simple and economically ef-
cient experimental procedure. When we are remote from the optimum, we usually assume that
a rst-order model is an adequate approximation to the true surface in a small region of the x’s.
The method of steepest ascent is a procedure for moving sequentially in the direction
of the maximum increase in the response. Of course, if minimization is desired, then we call
this technique the method of steepest descent. The tted rst-order model is
(11.3)
yˆ ˆ
0 
k
i1
ˆ
i xi
480
Chapter 11 ■Response Surface Methods and Designs
Region
of the
optimum
Path of
improvement
Region of
operability
for the
process
Contours
of constant
response
Current
operating
conditions
85
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
■F I G U R E 1 1 . 3
The sequential nature of RSM
