This same procedure can be applied to the 16-, 32-, and 64-run 2k designs. For 16 runs,
it is possible to construct resolution V fractional factorials with two two-level factors and
either two or three factors at three levels. A 16-run resolution V fraction can also be obtained with
three two-level factors and one three-level factor. If we include 4 two-level factors and a
single three-level factor in 16 runs, the design will be of resolution III. The 32- and 64-run
designs allow similar arrangements. For additional discussion of some of these designs, see
Addelman (1962).
9.4.2
Factors at Two and Four Levels
It is very easy to accommodate a four-level factor in a 2k design. The procedure for doing this
involves using two two-level factors to represent the four-level factor. For example, suppose
that A is a four-level factor with levels a1, a2, a3, and a4. Consider two columns of the usual
table of plus and minus signs, say columns P and Q. The pattern of signs in these two columns
is as shown on the left side of Table 9.12. The right side of this table shows how these four
sign patterns would correspond to the four levels of factor A. The effects represented by
columns P and Q and the PQ interaction are mutually orthogonal and correspond to the
three-degrees-of-freedom A effect. This method of constructing a four-level factor from two
two-level factors is called the method of replacement.
To illustrate this idea more completely, suppose that we have one four-level factor and
two two-level factors and that we need to estimate all the main effects and interactions involv-
ing these factors. This can be done with a 16-run design. Table 9.13 shows the usual table of
plus and minus signs for the 16-run 24 design, with columns A and B used to form the four-
level factor, say X, with levels x1, x2, x3, and x4. Sums of squares would be calculated for each
column A, B, . . . , ABCD just as in the usual 2k system. Then the sums of squares for all fac-
tors X, C, D, and their interactions are formed as follows:
 (3 degrees of freedom)
SSXCD SSACD SSBCD SSABCD
 (3 degrees of freedom)
SSXD SSAD SSBD SSABD
 (3 degrees of freedom)
SSXC SSAC SSBC SSABC
 (1 degree of freedom)
SSCD SSCD
 (1 degree of freedom)
SSD SSD
 (1 degree of freedom)
SSC SSC
 (3 degrees of freedom)
SSX SSA SSB SSAB
414
Chapter 9 ■Additional Design and Analysis Topics for Factorial and Fractional Factorial Designs
■TA B L E 9 . 1 2
Four-Level Factor A Expressed as Two Two-Level Factors
Two-Level Factors
Four-Level Factor
Run
P
Q
A
1


a1
2


a2
3


a3
4


a4
