To resolve this ambiguity requires additional runs. In Chapter 8 we illustrated the use of both a
fold-over and a partial fold-over strategy to resolve the aliasing. We also saw an example of a res-
olution III 27-4fractional factorial in an eye focus time experiment where fold-over was required
to identify a large two-factor interaction effect.
While strong two-factor interactions may be less likely than strong main effects, there
are likely to be many more interactions than main effects in screening situations. As a
result, the likelihood of at least one significant interaction effect is quite high. There is often
substantial reluctance to commit additional time and material to a study with unclear
results. Consequently, experimenters often want to avoid the need for a follow-up study. In
this section we show how specific choices of nonregular two-level fractional factorial
designs can be used in experiments with between 6 and 14 factors and potentially avoid
subsequent experimentation when two-factor interactions are active. Section 9.5.1 presents
designs for 6, 7, and 8 factors in 16 runs. These designs have no complete confounding of
pairs of two-factor interactions. These designs are excellent alternatives for the regular min-
imum aberration resolution IV fractional factorials. In Section 9.5.2 we present nonregular
designs for between 9 and 14 factors in 16 runs that have no complete aliasing of main
effects and two-factor interactions. These designs are alternative to the regular minimum
aberration resolution III fractional factorials. We also present metrics to evaluate these frac-
tional factorial designs, show how the recommended nonregular 16-run designs were
obtained, and discuss analysis methods.
Screening designs are primarily concerned with the discovery of active factors. This
factor activity generally expresses itself through a main effect or a factor’s involvement in a
two-factor interaction. Consider the model
(9.7)
where X contains columns for the intercept, main effects and all two-factor interactions,
is
the vector of model parameters, and 
is the usual vector of NID(0,
) random errors.
Consider the case of six factors in 16 runs and a model with all main effects and two-factor
interactions. For this situation the X matrix has more columns than rows. Thus, it is not of full
rank and the usual least squares estimate for 
does not exist because the matrix XX is sin-
gular. With respect to this model, every 16 run design is supersaturated. Booth and Cox
(1962) introduced the E(s2) criterion as a diagnostic measure for comparing supersaturated
designs, where 
and k is the number of columns in X.
Minimizing the E(s2) criterion is equivalent to minimizing the sum of squared off-
diagonal elements of the correlation matrix of X. Removing the constant column from X, the
correlation matrix of the regular resolution IV 16-run six-factor design is 21 21 with one
row and column for each of the six main effects and 15 two-factor interactions. Figure 9.10
shows the cell plot of the correlation matrix for the principal fraction of this design. In
Figure 9.10 we note that the correlation is zero between all main effects and two-factor inter-
actions (because the design is resolution IV) and that the correlation is 1 between every
two-factor interaction and at least one other two-factor interaction. These two-factor interac-
tions are completely confounded. If another member of the same design family had been
used, at least one of the generators would gave been used with a negative sign in design con-
struction and some of the entries of the correlation matrix would have been 1. There still
would be complete confounding of two-factor interactions in the design.
Jones and Montgomery (2010) introduced the cell plot of the correlation matrix as a
useful graphical way to show the aliasing relationships in fractional factorials and to compare
nonregular designs to their regular fractional factorial counterparts. In Figure 9.10 it is a display
E(s2) i!j(Xi'Xj)2/(k(k-1))

2


y X 
416
Chapter 9 ■Additional Design and Analysis Topics for Factorial and Fractional Factorial Designs
