9.6.1
Design Optimality Criterion
In Chapter 6 (Section 6.7) we introduced three design optimality criteriaÔÇöD-optimality,
G-optimality, and I-optimality. The D-optimal design employs a criterion on the selection of
design points that results in the minimization of the volume of the joint conţüędence region of the
regression coefţüęcients. This is achieved by maximizing the determinant (hence, the ÔÇťDÔÇŁ in 
D-optimal) of the XţÇëX matrix. That is, the quantity |XţÇëX| is maximized over all possible designs
with N runs. The covariance or dispersion matrix, (XţÇëX)ţÇÇ1, contains the variances and covari-
ance of the regression coefţüęcients and the square of the volume of the conţüędence region is
inversely proportional to |XÔÇÖX|. Controlling the volume of the conţüędence region is related to the
precision of the regression coefţüęcients; a smaller conţüędence region, for the same level of con-
ţüędence, means more precise estimates. The G-optimal design minimizes the maximum value
of prediction variance in the design region R. The I-optimal design minimizes the integrated or
average prediction variance of the regression model over the design region R.
The D-optimal and I-optimal are the two most widely used. Experimental designs that are
created with respect to both D-optimal and I-optimal criteria are available in many commercial-
ly available software packages. Creating these designs requires an optimization algorithm.
Techniques such as the coordinate exchange method of Meyer and Nachtsheim (1995) have
been developed that minimize the computational burden and reduce the time required to ţüęnd the
optimal design. These techniques do not always guarantee a global optimal, but the efţüęciency,
a metric that quantiţüęes the quality of an optimal design, in terms of the best possible design is
reported by the software programs. 
9.6.2
Examples of Optimal Designs
Many of the standard designs this book are optimal designs. To illustrate, recall the 2k facto-
rial design. The 2k factorial and its many variants are probably the most widely used family
of designs in industrial research and development. In Section 6.7 of Chapter 6 we showed that
these designs are optimal designs with respect to the D, G, and I criteria.
The fact that many widely used standard designs are optimal designs suggests that the
optimal design approach is applicable in any design situation. If the problem turns out to be
a standard one, an optimal design algorithm will generate the required standard design. But
if not, then the optimal design approach will be necessary to construct the appropriate design
for this speciţüęc research problem.
As an example, consider a situation in which there are two categorical factors with three
levels each. A scenario where this situation might occur is in missile testing. For example, assume
that the White Sands missile range testing center wants to compare distance from target for three
different types of missiles (x1ţÇâL1, L2, L3), each containing a slightly different metal alloy encas-
ing, and three different launching mechanisms (x2 ţÇâ L1, L2, L3). Using this example, both D-
optimal and I-optimal designs can be created for the main effect only model and main effects plus
two-factor interaction model. Let us assume that the experimenter is interested in a 9-run design.
The D-optimal and IÔÇôoptimal designs for the main effects only model were found using JMP and
are presented in Tables 9.32 and 9.33, respectively. Notice that both designs are identical; in fact,
they are both 32 factorial designs. If we augment the model to include the two-factor interaction
term and construct 9-run D-optimal and I-optimal designs we get the same results. 
Both of the designs in Tables 9.32 and 9.33 are unreplicated factorials. Usually the
experimenter would like to replicate the design in order to obtain an estimate of experimen-
tal error that would support statistical testing. If the design is replicated twice, this would
require a total of 18 runs. We would still have a standard design. However, since each run
requires ţüęring a missile, and these runs are likely very expensive, the experimenter would
probably be interested in a design with fewer runs. Suppose that the experimenter wants to ţüęt
9.6 Constructing Factorial and Fractional Factorial Designs Using an Optimal Design Tool
433
