448
Chapter 9 ■Additional Design and Analysis Topics for Factorial and Fractional Factorial Designs
9.32.
Suppose that you must design an experiment to
investigate seven continuous factors. Running all factors at
two levels is thought to be appropriate but that only the two-
factor interactions involving factor A are of interest.
(a) How many runs are required to estimate all of the rel-
evant effects?
(b) Find a minimum-run D-optimal design that is suitable
for this problem.
9.33.
Suppose that you must design an experiment to inves-
tigate six continuous factors. It is thought that running all 
factors at two levels is adequate but that only the AB, AC, and
AD two-factor interactions are of interest.  
(a) How many runs are required to estimate all of the
effects that are of interest?
(b) Find a minimum-run D-optimal design that is suitable
for this problem.
9.34.
Suppose that you must design an experiment with six
categorical factors. Factor A has six levels, factor B has ve
levels, factor C has ve levels, factor D has three levels, and
factors E and F have two levels. You are interested in main
effects and two-factor interactions.
(a) How many runs are required to estimate all of the
effects that are of interest?
(b) Find a D-optimal design that is suitable for this problem.
(c) Suppose that the experimenter decides that this design
requires too many runs. What strategy would you 
recommend?
concentration of nitrogen source (soybean meal), and temper-
ature of incubation for their effects on the production of anti-
fungal antibiotic by the isolate Thermomonospora sp MTCC
3340. A 33 factorial design was conducted and the results are
shown in the table on the previous page.
(a) Analyze the data from this experiment.
(b) Fit a second-order model to the activity response.
Construct contour plots and response surface plots to
assist in interpreting the results of this experiment.
(c) What operating conditions would you recommend to
optimize this process?
9.29.
Construct a minimum-run D-optimal resolution IV
design for 10 factors. Find the alias relationships. What
approach would you recommend for analyzing the data from
this experiment?
9.30.
Construct a minimum-run D-optimal resolution IV
design for 12 factors. Find the alias relationships. What
approach would you recommend for analyzing the data from
this experiment?
9.31.
Suppose that you must design an experiment to inves-
tigate nine continuous factors. It is thought that running all
factors at two levels is adequate but that all two-factor inter-
actions are of interest.
(a) How many runs are required to estimate all main
effects and two-factor interactions?
(b) Find a minimum-run D-optimal design that is suitable
for this problem.
