9.6 Constructing Factorial and Fractional Factorial Designs Using an Optimal Design Tool
443
■TA B L E 9 . 4 6
Relative Variances for the Individual Model Effects
for the 15-Run D-optimal Design in Table 9.16
Effect
Relative Variance
Intercept
0.077
A1
0.075
A2
0.069
A3
0.078
A4
0.084
B1
0.087
B2
0.063
B3
0.100
C1
0.070
C2
0.068
D
0.077
E
0.077
factor. However, it is nearly orthogonal. To see this, consider the relative variances of the model
coefcients shown in Table 9.46, and notice that all of the relative variances are very similar.
9.6.3
Extensions of the Optimal Design Approach
We have discussed the use of design optimality for relatively simple situations. There are sev-
eral extensions of these ideas that practitioners should be aware of.
A criticism often leveled at the optimal design approach is that the nal design depends
on the model chosen by the experimenter. DuMouchel and Jones (1994) introduce a Bayesian
modication of the D-optimal design that affords protection to experimenters against terms that
are not in the assumed model. They assume that the model contains p primary terms but they
want to obtain protection against q potential model terms. These potential terms are typically of
higher order than those in the primary model. Their Bayesian D-optimal designs have N runs,
where p N p q. These designs allow some of the potential model terms to be t if nec-
essary. Jones, Lin, and Nachtsheim (2008) use the Bayesian D-optimality approach to construct
supersaturated fractional factorial designs. Andere-Rendon, Montgomery, and Rollier (1997)
use this approach to design mixture experiments in the presence of model uncertainty. Mixture
problems are introduced in Chapter 11.
We noted earlier that the G-optimal design criterion makes use of an objective function
that involves minimizes the maximum value of the prediction variance in the design region.
Constructing G-optimal designs has historically proved difcult because two optimization prob-
lems must be solved—nding the best coordinate value to change in the current design and
determining the maximum value of the scaled prediction variance for each new design that is
evaluated. Rodriguez et al. (2010) describe a commercially viable algorithm for constructing
G-optimal designs and compare the performance of several G-optimal designs to their I-optimal
and D-optimal counterparts.
It is also possible to construct optimal designs for nonlinear models. In linear models the
optimal design problem is relatively simple because the model covariance matrix XX does not
contain any of the unknown parameters . However, if the model is nonlinear, this is not the
case. To nd a D-optimal design for a nonlinear model, we must nd design points that max-
imize the determinant of DD, where D is a matrix of partial derivatives of the nonlinear model
expectation function with respect to each model parameter evaluated at each design point. This

