470
Chapter 10 ■Fitting Regression Models
10.7
Regression Model Diagnostics
As we emphasized in designed experiments, model adequacy checking is an important part
of the data analysis procedure. This is equally important in building regression models, and
as we illustrated in Example 10.1, the residual plots that we used with designed experiments
should always be examined for a regression model. In general, it is always necessary to (1)
examine the tted model to ensure that it provides an adequate approximation to the true sys-
tem and (2) verify that none of the least squares regression assumptions are violated. The
regression model will probably give poor or misleading results unless it is an adequate t.
In addition to residual plots, other model diagnostics are frequently useful in regression.
This section briey summarizes some of these procedures. For more complete presentations,
see Montgomery, Peck, and Vining (2006) and Myers (1990).
10.7.1
Scaled Residuals and PRESS
Standardized and Studentized Residuals. Many model builders prefer to work
with scaled residuals in contrast to the ordinary least squares residuals. These scaled residu-
als often convey more information than do the ordinary residuals.
One type of scaled residual is the standardized residual:
(10.43)
where we generally use 
in the computation. These standardized residuals have
mean zero and approximately unit variance; consequently, they are useful in looking for out-
liers. Most of the standardized residuals should lie in the interval 3 di 3, and any
observation with a standardized residual outside of this interval is potentially unusual with
respect to its observed response. These outliers should be carefully examined because they
may represent something as simple as a data-recording error or something of more serious
concern, such as a region of the regressor variable space where the tted model is a poor
approximation to the true response surface.
The standardizing process in Equation 10.43 scales the residuals by dividing them by
their approximate average standard deviation. In some data sets, residuals may have standard
deviations that differ greatly. We now present a scaling that takes this into account.
The vector of tted values 
corresponding to the observed values yi is
(10.44)
The n n matrix H X(XX)1Xis usually called the “hat” matrix because it maps the
vector of observed values into a vector of tted values. The hat matrix and its properties play
a central role in regression analysis.
The residuals from the tted model may be conveniently written in matrix notation as
and it turns out that the covariance matrix of the residuals is
(10.45)
The matrix I H is generally not diagonal, so the residuals have different variances and they
are correlated.
Cov(e) 2 (I H)
e y yˆ
Hy
X(XX)1Xy
yˆ X ˆ&
yˆi
ˆ MSE
di ei
ˆ i 1, 2, . . . , n
