there are no simple augmentation schemes (such as fold over) that can be used to combine
two or more fractions to isolate significant interactions. The 3k design is often suggested
as appropriate when curvature is present. However, more efficient alternatives (see
Chapter 11) are possible. 
9.4
Factorials with Mixed Levels
We have emphasized factorial and fractional factorial designs in which all the factors have the
same number of levels. The two-level system discussed in Chapters 6, 7, and 8 is particularly
useful. The three-level system presented earlier in this chapter is much less useful because the
designs are relatively large even for a modest number of factors, and most of the small
fractions have complex alias relationships that would require very restrictive assumptions
regarding interactions to be useful.
It is our belief that the two-level factorial and fractional factorial designs should be the
cornerstone of industrial experimentation for product and process development, troubleshoot-
ing, and improvement. In some situations, however, it is necessary to include a factor (or a few
factors) that has more than two levels. This usually occurs when there are both quantitative and
qualitative factors in the experiment, and the qualitative factor has (say) three levels. If all fac-
tors are quantitative, then two-level designs with center points should be employed. In this sec-
tion, we show how some three- and four-level factors can be accommodated in a 2k design.
9.4.1
Factors at Two and Three Levels
Occasionally, there is interest in a design that has some factors at two levels and some factors
at three levels. If these are full factorials, then construction and analysis of these designs pres-
ents no new challenges. However, interest in these designs can occur when a fractional facto-
rial design is being contemplated. If all of the factors are quantitative, mixed-level fractions
are usually poor alternatives to a 2kp fractional factorial with center points. Usually when
these designs are considered, the experimenter has a mix of qualitative and quantitative
factors, with the qualitative factors taking on three levels. The complex aliasing we observed
in the 3kp design with qualitative factors carries over to a great extent in the mixed-level frac-
tional system. Thus, mixed-level fractional designs with all qualitative factors or a mix of
qualitative and quantitative factors should be used very carefully. This section gives a brief
discussion of some of these designs.
Designs in which some factors have two levels and other factors have three levels can
be derived from the table of plus and minus signs for the usual 2k design. The general proce-
dure is best illustrated with an example. Suppose we have two variables, with A at two levels
and X at three levels. Consider a table of plus and minus signs for the usual eight-run 23
design. The signs in columns B and C have the pattern shown on the left side of Table 9.9. Let
412
Chapter 9 ■Additional Design and Analysis Topics for Factorial and Fractional Factorial Designs
■TA B L E 9 . 9
Use of Two-Level Factors to Form a Three-Level Factor
Two-Level Factors
Three-Level Factor
B
C
X


x1


x2


x2


x3
