464
Chapter 10 ■Fitting Regression Models
These computations are almost always performed with regression software. For instance,
Table 10.4 shows some of the output from Minitab for the viscosity regression model in
Example 10.1. The upper portion in this display is the analysis of variance for the model. The
test of signicance of regression in this example involves the hypotheses
The P-value in Table 10.4 for the F statistic (Equation 10.22) is very small, so we would con-
clude that at least one of the two variables—temperature (x1) and feed rate (x2)—has a nonzero
regression coefcient.
Table 10.4 also reports the coefcient of multiple determination R2, where
(10.26)
Just as in designed experiments, R2 is a measure of the amount of reduction in the variability
of y obtained by using the regressor variables x1, x2, . . . , xk in the model. However, as we
have noted previously, a large value of R2 does not necessarily imply that the regression model
is a good one. Adding a variable to the model will always increase R2, regardless of whether
the additional variable is statistically signicant or not. Thus, it is possible for models that
have large values of R2 to yield poor predictions of new observations or estimates of the mean
response.
Because R2 always increases as we add terms to the model, some regression model
builders prefer to use an adjusted R2 statistic dened as
(10.27)
In general, the adjusted R2 statistic will not always increase as variables are added to the model.
In fact, if unnecessary terms are added, the value of 
will often decrease.
For example, consider the viscosity regression model. The adjusted R2 for the model is
shown in Table 10.4. It is computed as
which is very close to the ordinary R2. When R2 and 
differ dramatically, there is a good
chance that nonsignicant terms have been included in the model.
10.4.2
Tests on Individual Regression Coefﬁcients
and Groups of Coefﬁcients
We are frequently interested in testing hypotheses on the individual regression coefcients.
Such tests would be useful in determining the value of each regressor variable in the regres-
sion model. For example, the model might be more effective with the inclusion of additional
variables or perhaps with the deletion of one or more of the variables already in the model.
Adding a variable to the regression model always causes the sum of squares for regres-
sion to increase and the error sum of squares to decrease. We must decide whether the increase
in the regression sum of squares is sufcient to warrant using the additional variable in the model.
Furthermore, adding an unimportant variable to the model can actually increase the mean square
error, thereby decreasing the usefulness of the model.
R2
adj
1 
15
13(1 0.92697) 0.915735
R2
adj 1 
n 1
n p(1 R2)
R2
adj
R2
adj 1 SSE/(n p)
SST/(n 1) 1 
n 1
n p(1 R2)
R2 SSR
SST
1 SSE
SST
H1j Z 0 
 for at least one j
H01 2  0
