10.7 Regression Model Diagnostics
471
Thus, the variance of the ith residual is
(10.46)
where hii is the ith diagonal element of H. Because 0 hii 1, using the residual mean square
MSE to estimate the variance of the residuals actually overestimates V(ei). Furthermore,
because hii is a measure of the location of the ith point in x-space, the variance of ei depends
on where the point xi lies. Generally, residuals near the center of the x space have larger vari-
ance than do residuals at more remote locations. Violations of model assumptions are more
likely at remote points, and these violations may be hard to detect from inspection of ei
(or di) because their residuals will usually be smaller.
We recommend taking this inequality of variance into account when scaling the resid-
uals. We suggest plotting the studentized residuals:
(10.47)
with
MSE instead of ei (or di). The studentized residuals have constant variance V(ri) 1
regardless of the location of xi when the form of the model is correct. In many situations the
variance of the residuals stabilizes, particularly for large data sets. In these cases, there may be
little difference between the standardized and studentized residuals. Thus standardized and stu-
dentized residuals often convey equivalent information. However, because any point with a
large residual and a large hii is potentially highly inuential on the least squares t, examina-
tion of the studentized residuals is generally recommended. Table 10.3 displays the hat diago-
nals hii and the studentized residuals for the viscosity regression model in Example 10.1.
PRESS Residuals. The prediction error sum of squares (PRESS) provides a useful
residual scaling. To calculate PRESS, we select an observation—for example, i. We t the
regression model to the remaining n 1 observations and use this equation to predict the
withheld observation yi. Denoting this predicted value 
, we may nd the prediction error
for point i as e(i) yi 
. The prediction error is often called the ith PRESS residual. This
procedure is repeated for each observation i 1, 2, . . . , n, producing a set of n PRESS resid-
uals e(1), e(2), . . . , e(n). Then the PRESS statistic is dened as the sum of squares of the n
PRESS residuals as in
(10.48)
Thus PRESS uses each possible subset of n 1 observations as an estimation data set, and
every observation in turn is used to form a prediction data set.
It would initially seem that calculating PRESS requires tting n different regressions.
However, it is possible to calculate PRESS from the results of a single least squares t to all
n observations. It turns out that the ith PRESS residual is
(10.49)
Thus because PRESS is just the sum of the squares of the PRESS residuals, a simple comput-
ing formula is
(10.50)
From Equation 10.49, it is easy to see that the PRESS residual is just the ordinary residual
weighted according to the diagonal elements of the hat matrix hii. Data points for which hii are
large will have large PRESS residuals. These observations will generally be high inﬂuence
PRESS 
n
i1
ei
1 hii
2
e(i) 
ei
1 hii
PRESS 
n
i1
e2
(i) 
n
i1
 [yi yˆ(i)]2
yˆ(i)
yˆ(i)
ˆ 2
ri 
ei
ˆ 2(1 hii)
 
 i 1, 2, . . . , n
V(ei) 2(1 hii)
