12.4 Combined Array Designs and the Response Model Approach
561
12.4
Combined Array Designs and the Response Model Approach
As noted in the previous section, interactions between controllable and noise factors are the
key to a robust design problem. Therefore, it is logical to use a model for the response that
includes both controllable and noise factors and their interactions. To illustrate, suppose that
we have two controllable factors x1 and x2 and a single noise factor z1. We assume that both
control and noise factors are expressed as the usual coded variables (that is, they are centered
at zero and have lower and upper limits at a). If we wish to consider a rst-order model
involving the controllable and noise variables, a logical model is
(12.1)
Notice that this model has the main effects of both controllable factors and their interaction,
the main effect of the noise variable, and interactions between the both controllable and noise
variables. This type of model, incorporating both controllable and noise variables, is often
called a response model. Unless at least one of the regression coefcients 11 and 21 is
nonzero, there will be no robust design problem.
An important advantage of the response model approach is that both the controllable
factors and the noise factors can be placed in a single experimental design; that is, the inner
and outer array structure of the Taguchi approach can be avoided. We usually call the design
containing both controllable and noise factors a combined array design.
As mentioned previously, we assume that noise variables are random variables,
although they are controllable for purposes of an experiment. Specically, we assume that the
noise variables are expressed in coded units, they have expected value zero, and variance 
and if there are several noise variables, they have zero covariances. Under these assumptions,
it is easy to nd a model for the mean response just by taking the expected value of y in
Equation 12.1. This yields
(12.2)
where the z subscript on the expectation operator is a reminder to take expected value with
respect to both random variables in Equation 12.1, z1 and . To nd a model for the variance
of the response y, we use the transmission of error approach. First, expand the response
model Equation 12.1 in a rst-order Taylor series around z1 0. This gives
where R is the remainder term in the Taylor series. As is the usual practice, we will ignore the
remainder term. Now the variance of y can be obtained by applying the variance operator
across this last expression (without R). The resulting variance model is
(12.3)
Once again, we have used the z subscript on the variance operator as a reminder that both z1
and are random variables.
Equations 12.2 and 12.3 are simple models for the mean and variance of the response
variable of interest. Note the following:
1. The mean and variance models involve only the controllable variables. This
means that we can potentially set the controllable variables to achieve a target value
of the mean and minimize the variability transmitted by the noise variable.
Vz(y) 2
z(1 11x1 21x2)2 2
(1 11x1 21x2)z1 R 
0 1x1 2x2 12x1x2
y yz0 dy
dz1
(z1 0) R 
Ez(y) 0 1x1 2x2 12x1x2
2
z,
y 0 1x1 2x2 12x1x2 1z1 11x1z1 21x2z1 
