11.4 Experimental Designs for Fitting Response Surfaces
507
Figure 11.26a is a VDG for the rotatable CCD with k 3 variables and four center
runs. Because the design is rotatable, the minimum, maximum, and average SPV are identi-
cal for all points that are at the same distance from the center of the design, so there is only
one line on the VDG. Notice how the graph displays the behavior of the SPV over the design
space, with nearly constant variance out to a radius of approximately 1.2, and then increasing
steadily from there out to the boundary of the design. Figure 11.26b is the VDG for a spher-
ical CCD with k 3 variables and four center runs. Notice that there is very little difference
between the three lines for minimum, maximum, and average SPV, leading us to conclude
that any practical difference between the rotatable and spherical versions of this design is very
minimal.
Figure 11.27 is the VDG for the rotatable CCD with k 4 factors. In this VDG, the
number of center points in the design varies from nC 1 to nC 5. The VDG shows clearly
that a design with too few center points will have a very unstable distribution of prediction
variance but that prediction variance quickly stabilizes with increasing values of nC. Using
either four or ve center runs will give reasonably stable prediction variance over the design
region. VDGs have been used to study the effect of changing the number of center runs in
response surface design, and the recommendations given earlier in the chapter are based on
some of these studies.
11.4.3
Blocking in Response Surface Designs
When using response surface designs, it is often necessary to consider blocking to eliminate
nuisance variables. For example, this problem may occur when a second-order design is
assembled sequentially from a rst-order design, as was illustrated in Examples 11.1 and 11.2.
Considerable time may elapse between the running of the rst-order design and the running of
the supplemental experiments required to build up a second-order design, and test conditions
may change during this time, thus necessitating blocking.
A response surface design is said to block orthogonally if it is divided into blocks such
that block effects do not affect the parameter estimates of the response surface model. If a 2k
or 2kp design is used as a rst-order response surface design, the methods of Chapter 7 may
be used to arrange the runs in 2r blocks. The center points in these designs should be allocated
equally among the blocks.
For a second-order design to block orthogonally, two conditions must be satised. If
there are nb observations in the bth block, then these conditions are
1. Each block must be a rst-order orthogonal design; that is,
where xiu and xju are the levels of ith and jth variables in the uth run of the experiment
with x0u 1 for all u.
2. The fraction of the total sum of squares for each variable contributed by every
block must be equal to the fraction of the total observations that occur in the block;
that is,
where N is the number of runs in the design.

nb
u1
x2
iu

N
u1
x2
iu
nb
N 
 i 1, 2, . . . , k 
 for all b

nb
u1
xiu xju 0 
 i Z j 0, 1, . . . , k 
 for all b
