554
C H A P T E R 1 2
R o b u s t P a r a m e t e r
D e s i g n a n d P r o c e s s
R o b u s t n e s s S t u d i e s
CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1 INTRODUCTION
12.2 CROSSED ARRAY DESIGNS
12.3 ANALYSIS OF THE CROSSED ARRAY DESIGN
12.4 COMBINED ARRAY DESIGNS AND THE
RESPONSE MODEL APPROACH
12.5 CHOICE OF DESIGNS
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL FOR CHAPTER 12
S12.1 The Taguchi Approach to Robust Parameter Design
S12.2 Taguchi’s Technical Methods
12.1
Introduction
Robust parameter design (RPD) is an approach to product realization activities that focuses
on choosing the levels of controllable factors (or parameters) in a process or a product to achieve
two objectives: (1) to ensure that the mean of the output response is at a desired level or target
and (2) to ensure that the variability around this target value is as small as possible. When an
RPD study is conducted on a process, it is usually called a process robustness study. The
general RPD problem was developed by a Japanese engineer, Genichi Taguchi, and intro-
duced in the United States in the 1980s (see Taguchi and Wu, 1980; Taguchi, 1987). Taguchi
proposed an approach to solving the RPD problem based on designed experiments and some
novel methods for analysis of the resulting data. His philosophy and technical methods gen-
erated widespread interest among engineers and statisticians, and during the 1980s his
methodology was used at many large corporations, including AT&T Bell Laboratories, Ford
Motor Company, and Xerox. These techniques generated controversy and debate in the
statistical and engineering communities. The controversy was not about the basic RPD prob-
lem, which is an extremely important one, but rather about the experimental procedures and
the data analysis methods that Taguchi advocated. Extensive analysis revealed that Taguchi’s
technical methods were usually inefcient and, in many cases, ineffective. Consequently, a
period of extensive research and development on new approaches to the RPD problem
followed. From these efforts, response surface methodology (RSM) emerged as an approach
to the RPD problem that not only allows us to employ Taguchi’s robust design concept but
also provides a sounder and more efcient approach to design and analysis.
The supplemental material is on the textbook website www.wiley.com/college/montgomery.
