of event time. Frequently as much as 10 ms of event time must be modeled. Clearly the need
to limit experimentation or simulation is great. Therefore the typical approach of factor screen-
ing followed by optimization might well be applied to this scenario.
Remember that the response surface approach is based on a philosophy of sequential
experimentation, with the objective of approximating the response with a low-order polynomi-
al in a relatively small region of interest that contains the optimum solution. Some computer
experimenters advocate a somewhat different philosophy. They seek to nd a model that
approximates the true response surface over a much wider range of the design variables,
sometimes extending over the entire region of operability. As mentioned earlier in this sec-
tion, this can lead to situations where the model that is considered is much more complex than
the rst- and second-order polynomials typically employed in response surface methodology
[see, for example, Barton (1992, 1994), Mitchell and Morris (1992), and Simpson and
Peplinski (1997)].
The choice of a design for a computer simulation experiment presents some interesting
alternatives. If the experimenter is considering a polynomial model, then an optimal design
such as a D-optimal or I-optimal design is a possible choice. In recent years, various types of
space-ﬁlling designs have been suggested for computer experiments. Space-lling designs
are often thought to be particularly appropriate for deterministic computer models because in
general they spread the design points out nearly evenly or uniformly (in some sense) throughout
the region of experimentation. This is a desirable feature if the experimenter doesn’t know the
form of the model that is required, and believes that interesting phenomena are likely to be
found in different regions of the experimental space. Furthermore, most space-lling designs
do not contain any replicate runs. For a deterministic computer model this is desirable,
because a single run of the computer model at a design point provides all of the information
about the response at that point. Many space-lling designs do not contain replicates even if
some factors are dropped and they are projected into lower dimensions.
The rst space-lling design proposed was the Latin hypercube design [McKay,
Conover and Beckman (1979)]. A Latin hypercube in n runs for k factors in an n k matrix
524
Chapter 11 ■Response Surface Methods and Designs
Partial part list
Outer case
Constrainment ring
Shroud
Impeller fragment
Backface
Inlet
Transition duct
Inlet case
■F I G U R E 1 1 . 3 3
Finite element model for compressor containment
analysis of a turbine engine and partial parts list
