540
Chapter 11 ■Response Surface Methods and Designs
11.7
Evolutionary Operation
Response surface methodology is often applied to pilot plant operations by research and
development personnel. When it is applied to a full-scale production process, it is usually
done only once (or very infrequently) because the experimental procedure is relatively
elaborate. However, conditions that were optimum for the pilot plant may not be optimum
for the full-scale process. The pilot plant may produce 2 pounds of product per day, where-
as the full-scale process may produce 2000 pounds per day. This “scale-up” of the pilot
plant to the full-scale production process usually results in distortion of the optimum con-
ditions. Even if the full-scale plant begins operation at the optimum, it will eventually
“drift” away from that point because of variations in raw materials, environmental
changes, and operating personnel.
A method is needed for the continuous monitoring and improvement of a full-scale
process with the goal of moving the operating conditions toward the optimum or following
a “drift.” The method should not require large or sudden changes in operating conditions
that might disrupt production. Evolutionary operation (EVOP) was proposed by Box
(1957) as such an operating procedure. It is designed as a method of routine plant opera-
tion that is carried out by manufacturing personnel with minimum assistance from the
research and development staff.
EVOP consists of systematically introducing small changes in the levels of the operat-
ing variables under consideration. Usually, a 2k design is employed to do this. The changes in
the variables are assumed to be so small enough that serious disturbances in yield, quality, or
quantity will not occur, yet large enough that potential improvements in process performance
will eventually be discovered. Data are collected on the response variables of interest at each
point of the 2k design. When one observation has been taken at each design point, a cycle is
said to have been completed. The effects and interactions of the process variables may then
be computed. Eventually, after several cycles, the effect of one or more process variables or
their interactions may appear to have a signicant effect on the response. At this point, a deci-
sion may be made to change the basic operating conditions to improve the response. When
improved conditions have been detected, a phase is said to have been completed.
In testing the signicance of process variables and interactions, an estimate of experi-
mental error is required. This is calculated from the cycle data. Also, the 2k design is usually
centered about the current best operating conditions. By comparing the response at this point
with the 2k points in the factorial portion, we may check on curvature or change in mean
(CIM); that is, if the process is really centered at the maximum, say, then the response at the
center should be signicantly greater than the responses at the 2k-peripheral points.
In theory, EVOP can be applied to k process variables. In practice, only two or three
variables are usually considered. We will give an example of the procedure for two variables.
Box and Draper (1969) give a detailed discussion of the three-variable case, including neces-
sary forms and worksheets.
E X A M P L E 1 1 . 7
Consider a chemical process whose yield is a function of
temperature (x1) and pressure (x2). The current operating
conditions are x1 250°F and x2 145 psi. The EVOP
procedure uses the 22 design plus the center point shown in
Figure 11.49. The cycle is completed by running each
design point in numerical order (1, 2, 3, 4, 5). The yields in
the rst cycle are also shown in Figure 11.49.
The yields from the rst cycle are entered in the EVOP
calculation sheet, as shown in Table 11.23. At the end of the
rst cycle, no estimate of the standard deviation can be
