11.5 Experiments with Computer Models
523
11.5
Experiments with Computer Models
We customarily think of applying designed experiments to a physical process, such as chem-
ical vapor deposition in semiconductor manufacturing, wave soldering or machining.
However, designed experiments can also be successfully applied to computer simulation mod-
els of physical systems. In such applications, the data from the experimental design is used to
build a model of the system being modeled by the computer simulation—a metamodel—and
optimization is carried out on the metamodel. The assumption is that if the computer simula-
tion model is a faithful representation of the real system, then optimization of the model will
result in adequate determination of the optimum conditions for the real system.
Generally, there are two types of simulation models, stochastic and deterministic. In
a stochastic simulation model, the output responses are random variables. Examples include
systems simulations such as the factory planning and scheduling models used in the semicon-
ductor industry and trafc ow simulators employed by civil engineers, and Monte Carlo sim-
ulations that sample from probability distributions to study complex mathematical phenomena
that do not have direct analytical solutions. Sometimes the output from a stochastic simula-
tion model will be in the form of a time series. Often standard experimental design techniques
can be applied to the output from a stochastic simulation model, although a number of spe-
cialized techniques have been developed. Sometimes polynomials of higher-order than the
usual quadratic response surface model are used.
In a deterministic simulation model the output responses are not random variables; they
are entirely deterministic quantities whose values are determined by the (often highly complex)
mathematical models upon which the computer model is based. Deterministic simulation mod-
els are often used by engineers and scientists  as computer-based design tools. Typical examples
are circuit simulators used for designing electronic circuits and semiconductor devices, nite
element analysis models for mechanical and structural design and computational models for
physical phenomena such as uid dynamics. These are often very complex models, requiring
considerable computer resources and time to run.
As an example of a situation where a nite element analysis model may be employed,
consider the problem of designing a turbine engine to contain a failed compressor rotor. Many
factors may inuence the design, such as engine operating conditions as well as the location,
size, and material properties of surrounding parts. Figure 11.33 shows a cutaway view of a typ-
ical compressor containment model. Many parameters for each component are potentially
important. The thickness, material type, and geometric feature (bend radius, bolt hole size and
location, stiffening ribs or gussets, etc.) are engineering design parameters and, potentially,
experimental factors that could be included in a response surface model. One can see that large
numbers of factors are potentially important in the design of such a product. Furthermore, the
sign or direction of the effect of many of these factors is unknown. For instance, setting fac-
tors that increase the axial stiffness of a backface (such as increasing the thickness of the tran-
sition duct) may help align a rotor fragment, centering the impact on the containment structure.
On the other hand, the increased stiffness may nudge the fragment too much, causing it to miss
the primary containment structure. From experience the design engineers may condently
assume that only a small number of these potentially important factors have a signicant effect
on the performance of the design in containing a failed part. Detailed analysis or testing of the
turbine engine is needed to understand which factors are important and to quantify their effect
on the design. The cost of building a prototype turbine engine frequently exceeds one million
dollars, so studying the effects of these factors using a computer model is very attractive. The
type of model used is called a ﬁnite element analysis model. Simulating a containment event
with a nite element analysis model is very computationally intensive. The model shown in
Figure 11.32 has over 100,000 elements and takes about 90 hr of computer time to model 2 ms
