variance over the design space, say
where R is the design region and A is the volume of the region. Note that this is a more gen-
eral form of the I-criterion discussed in Chapter 6. The I criterion is also sometimes called the
IV or Q criterion. JMP can construct I-optimal designs.
Generally, we think of the D criteria as the most appropriate for rst-oder designs, as
they are associated with parameter estimation, which is very important in screening situations
where rst-order model are most often used. The G and I criteria are prediction-oriented cri-
teria, so they would be most likely used for second-order models, as second-order models are
often used for optimization, and good prediction properties are essential for optimization. The
I criteria is much easier to implement than G, and is available in several software packages.
One of the design construction methods is based on a point exchange algorithm. In the
simplest form of this algorithm, a grid of candidate points is selected by the experimenter, and
an initial design is selected (perhaps by random) from this set of points. Then the algorithm
exchanges points that are in the grid but not in the design with points currently in the design
in an effort to improve the selected optimality criterion. Because not every possible design is
explicitly evaluated, there is no guarantee that an optimal design has been found, but the
exchange procedure usually ensures that a design that is “close” to optimal results. The proce-
dure is also sensitive to the grid of candidate points that have been specied. Some implemen-
tations repeat the design construction process several times, starting from different initial
designs, to increase the likelihood that a nal design that is very near the optimal will result.
Another way to construct optimal design is with a coordinate exchange algorithm.
This method searches over each coordinate of every point in the initial design recursively until
no improvement in the optimality criterion is found. The procedure is usually repeated sever-
al times with each cycle starting with a randomly generated initial design. Coordinate
exchange is usually much more efcient than point exchange and is the standard method in
many software packages.
To illustrate some of these ideas, consider the adhesive experiment discussed previously
that led to the irregular experimental region in Figure 11.28. Suppose that the response of
interest is pull-off force and that we wish to t a second-order model to this response. In
Figure 11.29a, we show a central composite design with four center points (12 runs total)
inscribed inside this region. This is not a rotatable design, but it is the largest CCD that we
can t inside the design space. For this design, (XX)1 1.852 E-2 and the trace of
(XX)1 is 6.375. Also shown in Figure 11.29a are the contours of constant standard deviation
of the predicted response, calculated assuming that 1. Figure 11.29b shows the correspon-
ding response surface plot.
Figure 11.30a and Table 11.12 show a 12-run D-optimal design for this problem, gen-
erated with the Design-Expert software package. For this design, |(XX)1| 2.153 E-4.
Notice that the D-criterion is considerably better for this design than for the inscribed CCD.
The relative efciency of the inscribed CCD to the D-optimal design is
That is, the inscribed CCD is only 47.6 percent as efcient as the D-optimal design. This
implies that the CCD would have to be replicated 1/0.476 2.1 times (or approximately
twice) to have the same precision of estimation for the regression coefcients as achieved
with the D-optimal design. The trace of (XX)1 is 2.516 for the D-optimal design, indicating
that the sum of the variances of the regression coefcients is considerably smaller for this
De 
(X2 X2)1
(X1 X1)1
1/p

0.0002153
0.01852 
1/6
0.476


I 1
A
RV[ˆy(x)]dx
514
Chapter 11 ■Response Surface Methods and Designs
