2. Although the variance model involves only the controllable variables, it also
involves the interaction regression coefﬁcients between the controllable and noise
variables. This is how the noise variable inuences the response.
3. The variance model is a quadratic function of the controllable variables.
4. The variance model (apart from 2) is just the square of the slope of the tted
response model in the direction of the noise variable.
To use these models operationally, we would
1. Perform an experiment and fit an appropriate response model, such as 
Equation 12.1.
2. Replace the unknown regression coefcients in the mean and variance models
with their least squares estimates from the response model and replace 2 in the
variance model by the residual mean square found when tting the response
model.
3. Optimize the mean and variance model using the standard multiple response opti-
mization methods discussed in Section 11.3.4.
It is very easy to generalize these results. Suppose that there are k controllable variables
and r noise variables. We will write the general response model involving these variables as
(12.4)
where f(x) is the portion of the model that involves only the controllable variables and h(x, z)
are the terms that involve the main effects of the noise factors and the interactions between
the controllable and noise factors. Typically, the structure for h(x, z) is
The structure for f(x) will depend on what type of model for the controllable variables the
experimenter thinks is appropriate. The logical choices are the rst-order model with interac-
tion and the second-order model. If we assume that the noise variables have mean zero, vari-
ances 
, and zero covariances and that the noise variables and the random errors have zero
covariances, then the mean model for the response is just
(12.5)
and the variance model for the response is
(12.6)
Myers, Montgomery and Anderson-Cook (2009) give a slightly more general form for Equation
(12.6) based on applying a conditional variance operator directly to the response model.
Vz[y(x, z)] 
r
i1
y(x, z)
zi 
2
2
zi 2
Ez[y(x, z)] f(x)
2
zi
h(x, z) 
r
i1
izi 
k
i1 
r
j1
ij xizj
y(x, z) f(x) h(x, z) 
562
Chapter 12 ■Robust Parameter Design and Process Robustness Studies
E X A M P L E 1 2 . 1
To illustrate the foregoing procedure, reconsider Example
6.2 in which four factors were studied in a 24 factorial
design to investigate their effect on the ltration rate of a
chemical product. We will assume that factor A, tempera-
ture, is potentially difcult to control in the full-scale
process, but it can be controlled during the experiment
(which was performed in a pilot plant). The other three fac-
tors, pressure (B), concentration (C ), and stirring rate (D),
are easy to control. Thus, the noise factor z1 is temperature,
and the controllable variables x1, x2, and x3 are pressure,
concentration, and stirring rate, respectively. Because both
the controllable factors and the noise factor are in the same
