12.1 Introduction
555
This chapter is about the RSM approach to the RPD problem. More information about
the original Taguchi approach, including discussion that identies the pitfalls and inefciencies
of his methods, is presented in the supplemental text material for this chapter. Other useful
references include Hunter (1985, 1989), Box (1988), Box, Bisgaard, and Fung (1988),
Pignatiello and Ramberg (1992), Montgomery (1999), Myers, Montgomery and Anderson-Cook
(2009), and the panel discussion edited by Nair (1992).
In a robust design problem, the focus is usually on one or more of the following:
1. Designing systems that are insensitive to environmental factors that can affect per-
formance once the system is deployed in the eld. An example is the development
of an exterior paint that should exhibit long life when exposed to a variety of weath-
er conditions. Because the weather conditions are not entirely predictable, and cer-
tainly not constant, the product formulator wants the paint to be robust against or
withstand a wide range of temperature, humidity, and precipitation factors that
affect the wear and nish of the paint.
2. Designing products so that they are insensitive to variability transmitted by the
components of the system. An example is designing an electronic amplier so that
the output voltage is as close as possible to the desired target regardless of the vari-
ability in the electrical parameters of the transistors, resistors, and power supplies
that are the components of the system.
3. Designing processes so that the manufactured product will be as close as possible
to the desired target specications, even though some process variables (such as
temperature) or raw material properties are impossible to control precisely.
4. Determining the operating conditions for a process so that the critical process
characteristics are as close as possible to the desired target values and the variability
around this target is minimized. Examples of this type of problem occur frequently.
For example, in semiconductor manufacturing we want the oxide thickness on
a wafer to be as close as possible to the target mean thickness, and we want the
variability in thickness across the wafer (a measure of uniformity) to be as small
as possible.
RPD problems are not new. Product and process designers/developers have been con-
cerned about robustness issues for decades, and efforts to solve the problem long predate
Taguchi’s contributions. One of the classical approaches used to achieve robustness is to
redesign the product using stronger components, or components with tighter tolerances, or to
use different materials. However, this may lead to problems with overdesign, resulting in a
product that is more expensive, more difcult to manufacture, or suffers a weight and subse-
quent performance penalty. Sometimes different design methods or incorporation of new
technology into the design can be exploited. For example, for many years automobile
speedometers were driven by a metal cable, and over time the lubricant in the cable deterio-
rated, which could lead to operating noise in cold weather or erratic measurement of vehicle
speed. Sometimes the cable would break, resulting in an expensive repair. This is an example
of robustness problems caused by product aging. Modern automobiles use electronic
speedometers that are not subject to these problems. In a process environment, older equip-
ment may be replaced with new tools, which may improve process robustness but usually at
a signicant cost. Another possibility may be to exercise tighter control over the variables that
impact robustness. For example, if variations in environmental conditions cause problems
with robustness, then those conditions may have to be controlled more tightly. The use of
clean rooms in semiconductor manufacturing is a result of efforts to control environmental
conditions. In some cases, effort will be directed to controlling raw material properties or
process variables more tightly if these factors impact robustness. These classical approaches
