11.4 Experimental Designs for Fitting Response Surfaces
501
11.4.1
Designs for Fitting the First-Order Model
Suppose we wish to ţüęt the ţüęrst-order model in k variables
(11.14)
There is a unique class of designs that minimizes the variance of the regression coefţüęcients
. These are the orthogonal ´Čürst-order designs. A ţüęrst-order design is orthogonal if the
off-diagonal elements of the (XţÇĽX) matrix are all zero. This implies that the cross products of
the columns of the X matrix sum to zero.
The class of orthogonal ţüęrst-order designs includes the 2k factorial and fractions of the
2k series in which main effects are not aliased with each other. In using these designs, we
assume that the low and high levels of the k factors are coded to the usual ţÇł1 levels.
The 2k design does not afford an estimate of the experimental error unless some runs
are replicated. A common method of including replication in the 2k design is to augment the
design with several observations at the center (the point xi ţÇâ0, i ţÇâ1, 2, . . . , k). The addition
of center points to the 2k design does not inţü¬uence the 
for i ţÇľ1, but the estimate of ţÇü0
becomes the grand average of all observations. Furthermore, the addition of center points
does not alter the orthogonality property of the design. Example 11.1 illustrates the use of a
22 design augmented with ţüęve center points to ţüęt a ţüęrst-order model.
Another orthogonal ţüęrst-order design is the simplex. The simplex is a regularly sided
ţüęgure with k ţÇä1 vertices in k dimensions. Thus, the simplex design for k ţÇâ2 is an equilat-
eral triangle, and it is a regular tetrahedron for k ţÇâ3. Simplex designs in two and three
dimensions are shown in Figure 11.19.
11.4.2
Designs for Fitting the Second-Order Model
We have informally introduced in Example 11.2 (and even earlier, in Example 6.6) the cen-
tral composite design or CCD for ţüętting a second-order model. This is the most popular
class of designs used for ţüętting these models. Generally, the CCD consists of a 2k factorial (or
fractional factorial of resolution V) with nF factorial runs, 2k axial or star runs, and nC center
runs. Figure 11.20 shows the CCD for k ţÇâ2 and k ţÇâ3 factors.
The practical deployment of a CCD often arises through sequential experimentation,
as in Examples 11.1 and 11.2. That is, a 2k has been used to ţüęt a ţüęrst-order model, this model
has exhibited lack of ţüęt, and the axial runs are then added to allow the quadratic terms to be
incorporated into the model. The CCD is a very efţüęcient design for ţüętting the second-order
ţÇÇţÇü╦ć iţÇî
ţÇÇţÇü╦ć iţÇî
y ţÇâţÇü0 ţÇäţÇé
k
iţÇâ1
ţÇüi xi ţÇäţÇć
(a)
(b)
x2
x3
x2
x1
x1
ÔľáF I G U R E 1 1 . 1 9
The simplex design for (a) k ţÇü2 variables and 
(b) k ţÇü3 variables
