because under H0 both numerator and denominator of F0 have expectation 2, and only if H0
is false is E(MSAB) greater than E(MSE). The ratio F0 is distributed as F(a1)(b1),ab(n1).
Similarly, for testing H0:
0 we would use
(13.5)
which is distributed as Fa1,(a1)(b1), and for testing H0:
 0 the statistic is
(13.6)
which is distributed as Fb1,(a1)(b1). These are all upper-tail, one-tail tests. Notice that these
test statistics are not the same as those used if both factors A and B are xed. The expected
mean squares are always used as a guide to test statistic construction.
In many experiments involving random factors, interest centers at least as much on esti-
mating the variance components as on hypothesis testing. Recall from Chapter 3 that there are
two approaches to variance component estimation. The variance components may be estimated
by the analysis of variance method, that is, by equating the observed mean squares in the
lines of the analysis of variance table to their expected values and solving for the variance
components. This yields
(13.7)
as the point estimates of the variance components in the two-factor random effects model.
These are moment estimators. Some computer programs use this method. This will be illus-
trated in the following example.
ˆ 2
MSA MSAB
bn
ˆ 2
MSB MSAB
an
ˆ 2
MSAB MSE
n
ˆ 2 MSE
F0 MSB
MSAB
2

F0 MSA
MSAB
2

13.2 The Two-Factor Factorial with Random Factors
575
E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1
A Measurement Systems Capability Study
Statistically designed experiments are frequently used to
investigate the sources of variability that affect a system. A
common industrial application is to use a designed experi-
ment to study the components of variability in a measure-
ment system. These studies are often called gauge capabil-
ity studies or gauge repeatability and reproducibility
(R&R) studies because these are the components of vari-
ability that are of interest (for more discussion of gauge
R&R studies, see the supplemental material for this 
chapter).
A typical gauge R&R experiment from Montgomery
(2009) is shown in Table 13.1. An instrument or gauge is
used to measure a critical dimension on a part. Twenty parts
have been selected from the production process, and three
randomly selected operators measure each part twice with
this gauge. The order in which the measurements are made
is completely randomized, so this is a two-factor factorial
experiment with design factors parts and operators, with
two replications. Both parts and operators are random fac-
tors. The variance component identity in Equation 13.1
applies; namely,
2
y 2
2
2
2
