are still useful, but Taguchi’s principal contribution was the recognition that experimental
design and other statistical tools could be applied to the problem in many cases.
An important aspect of Taguchi’s approach was his notion that certain types of variables
cause variability in the important system response variables. We refer to these types of vari-
ables as noise variables or uncontrollable variables. We have discussed this concept
before—for example, see Figure 1.1. These noise factors are often functions of environmental
conditions such as temperature or relative humidity. They may be properties of raw materials
that vary from batch to batch or over time in the process. They may be process variables that are
difcult to control or to keep at specied targets. In some cases, they may involve the way the
consumer handles or uses the product. Noise variables may often be controlled at the research
or development level, but they cannot be controlled at the production or product use level. An
integral part of the RPD problem is identifying the controllable variables and the noise variables
that affect process or product performance and then nding the settings for the controllable vari-
ables that minimize the variability transmitted from the noise variables.
As an illustration of controllable and noise variables, consider a product developer who
is formulating a cake mix. The developer must specify the ingredients and composition of the
cake mix, including the amounts of our, sugar, dry milk, hydrogenated oils, corn starch, and
avorings. These variables can be controlled reasonably easily when the cake mix is manu-
factured. When the consumer bakes the cake, water and eggs are added, the mixture of wet
and dry ingredients is blended into cake batter, and the cake is baked in an oven at a speci-
ed temperature for a specied time. The product formulator cannot control exactly how
much water is added to the dry cake mix, how well the wet and dry ingredients are blended, or
the exact baking time or oven temperature. Target values for these variables can be and usually
are specied, but they are really noise variables, as there will be variation (perhaps considerable
variation) in the levels of these factors that are used by different customers. Therefore, the product
formulator has a robust design problem. The objective is to formulate a cake mix that will
perform well and meet or exceed customer expectations regardless of the variability transmitted
into the nal cake by the noise variables.
12.2
Crossed Array Designs
The original Taguchi methodology for the RPD problem revolved around the use of a statis-
tical design for the controllable variables and another statistical design for the noise variables.
Then these two designs were “crossed”; that is, every treatment combination in the design for
the controllable variables was run in combination with every treatment combination in the
noise variable design. This type of experimental design was called a crossed array design.
We will illustrate the crossed array design approach using the leaf spring experiment
originally introduced as Problem 8.10. In this experiment, ve factors were studied to deter-
mine their effect on the free height of a leaf spring used in an automotive application. There
were ve factors in the experiment; A furnace temperature, B heating time, C transfer
time, D hold down time, and E quench oil temperature. This was originally an RPD
problem, and quench oil temperature was the noise variable. The data from this experiment
are shown in Table 12.1. The design for the controllable factors is a 241 fractional factorial
design with generator D ABC. This is called the inner array design. The design for the sin-
gle noise factor is a 21 design, and it is called the outer array design. Notice how each run
in the outer array is performed for all eight treatment combinations in the inner array, produc-
ing the crossed array structure. In the leaf spring experiment, each of the 16 distinct design
points was replicated three times, resulting in 48 observations on free height.
An important point about the crossed array design is that it provides information about
interactions between controllable factors and noise factors. These interactions are crucial to the
556
Chapter 12 ■Robust Parameter Design and Process Robustness Studies
