11.4 Experimental Designs for Fitting Response Surfaces
513
3. Unusual sample size requirements.
Occasionally, an experimenter may need to
reduce the number of runs required by a standard response surface design. For
example, suppose we intend to ţüęt a second-order model in four variables. The cen-
tral composite design for this situation requires between 28 and 30 runs, depending
on the number of center points selected. However, the model has only 15 terms. If
the runs are extremely expensive or time-consuming, the experimenter will want a
design with fewer trials. Although computer-generated designs can be used for this
purpose, there are other approaches. For example, a small composite design can be
constructed for four factors with 20 runs, including four center points, and a hybrid
design with as few as 16 runs is also available. These may be superior choices to
using a computer-generated design to reduce the number of trials.
There are several popular design optimality criteria. Perhaps the most widely used is the
D-optimality criterion. A design is said to be D-optimal if
is minimized. A D-optimal design minimizes the volume of the joint conţüędence region on the
vector of regression coefţüęcients. A measure of the relative efţüęciency of design 1 to design 2
according to the D-criterion is given by
(11.21)
where X1 and X2 are the X matrices for the two designs and p is the number of model
parameters. Many popular software packages including JMP, Design-Expert, and Minitab
will construct D-optimal designs.
The A-optimality criterion deals with only the variances of the regression coefţüęcients.
A design is A-optimal if it minimizes the sum of the main diagonal elements of (XţÇĽX)ţÇÇ1. (This
is called the trace of (XţÇĽX)ţÇÇ1, usually denoted tr(XţÇĽX)ţÇÇ1.) Thus, an A-optimal design mini-
mizes the sum of the variances of the regression coefţüęcients.
Because many response surface experiments are concerned with the prediction of the
response, prediction variance criteria are of considerable practical interest. Perhaps the
most popular of these is the G-optimality criterion. A design is said to be G-optimal if it
minimizes the maximum scaled prediction variance over the design region; that is, if the
maximum value of
over the design region is a minimum, where N is the number of points in the design. If the
model has p parameters, the G-efţüęciency of a design is just
(11.22)
The V-criterion considers the prediction variance at a set of points of interest in the design
region, say x1, x2, . . . , xm. The set of points could be the candidate set from which the design
was selected, or it could be some other collection of points that have speciţüęc meaning to the
experimenter. A design that minimizes the average prediction variance over this set of m
points is a V-optimal design.
As we observed in Chapter 6 (Section 6.7), an alterative to calculating the prediction
variance at a ţüęnite set of points in the design space is to compute an average or integrated
Ge ţÇâ
p
max NV[y╦ć(x)]
ţÇÇ2
NV[y╦ć(x)]
ţÇÇ2
De ţÇâţÇâ
ţÇëXţÇĽ2 X2)ţÇÇ1ţÇë
ţÇë(XţÇĽ1 X1)ţÇÇ1ţÇëţÇä
1/p
ţÇë(XţÇĽX)ţÇÇ1ţÇë
