test statistics, the expected mean squares must be determined. In complex design situations,
particularly those involving random or mixed models, it is frequently helpful to have a formal
procedure for this process.
We will present a set of rules for writing down the number of degrees of freedom for
each model term and the expected mean squares for any balanced factorial, nested2, or nested
factorial experiment. (Note that partially balanced arrangements, such as Latin squares and
incomplete block designs, are specically excluded.) Other rules are available; for example,
see Scheffe (1959), Bennett and Franklin (1954), Corneld and Tukey (1956), and Searle
(1971a, 1971b). By examining the expected mean squares, one may develop the appropriate
statistic for testing hypotheses about any model parameter. The test statistic is a ratio of mean
squares that is chosen such that the expected value of the numerator mean square differs
from the expected value of the denominator mean square only by the variance component or
the xed factor in which we are interested.
It is always possible to determine the expected mean squares in any model as we did in
Chapter 3—that is, by the direct application of the expectation operator. This brute force
method, as it is often called, can be very tedious. The rules that follow always produce the
expected mean squares without resorting to the brute force approach, and they are relatively
simple to use. We illustrate the rules using the two-factor xed effects factorial model assum-
ing that there are n replicates.
Rule 1.
The error term in the model is ij . . . m, where the subscript m denotes the repli-
cation subscript. For the two-factor model, this rule implies that the error term is ijk.
The variance component associated with ij . . . m is 2.
Rule 2.
In addition to an overall mean () and an error term ij . . . m, the model con-
tains all the main effects and any interactions that the experimenter assumes exist.
If all possible interactions between k factors exist, then there are 
two-factor
interactions,
three-factor interactions, . . . , 1 k-factor interaction. If one of the
factors in a term appears in parentheses, then there is no interaction between that
factor and the other factors in that term.
Rule 3.
For each term in the model other than and the error term, divide the sub-
scripts into three classes: (a) live—those subscripts that are present in the term and are
not in parentheses; (b) dead—those subscripts that are present in the term and are in
parentheses; and (c) absent—those subscripts that are present in the model but not in
that particular term. Note that the two-factor xed effects model has no dead sub-
scripts, but we will encounter such models later. Thus, in the two-factor model, for the
term ()ij, i and j are live and k is absent.
Rule 4. Degrees of freedom.
The number of degrees of freedom for any effect in the
model is the product of the number of levels associated with each dead subscript and
the number of levels minus 1 associated with each live subscript. For example, the
number of degrees of freedom associated with ()ij is (a 1) (b 1). The number
of degrees of freedom for error is obtained by subtracting the sum of all other degrees
of freedom from N 1, where N is the total number of observations.
Rule 5.
Each term in the model has either a variance component (random effect) or a
xed factor (xed effect) associated with it. If an interaction contains at least one ran-
dom effect, the entire interaction is considered as random. A variance component has
Greek letters as subscripts to identify the particular random effect. Thus, in a two-
factor mixed model with factor A xed and factor B random, the variance component
for B is 
, and the variance component for AB is 
. A fixed effect is always
2

2

(k
3)
(k
2)
13.5 Rules for Expected Mean Squares
589
2Nested designs are discussed in Chapter 14. 
