664
Chapter 15 ■Other Design and Analysis Topics
strength, then we would try to equalize the strength output of the three machines. However,
in this problem the machines do not differ in the strength of ber produced after the linear
effect of ber diameter is removed. It would be helpful to reduce the within-machine ber
diameter variability because this would probably reduce the strength variability in the ber.
Analysis of Covariance as an Alternative to Blocking In some situations, the
experimenter may have a choice between either running a completely randomized design
with a covariate or running a randomized block design with the covariate used in some fash-
ion to form the blocks. If the relationship between the covariate and the response is really
well-approximated by a straight line and that is the form of the covariance model that the
experimenter chooses, then either of these approaches is about equally effective. However,
if the relationship isn’t linear and a linear model is assumed, the analysis of covariance will
be outperformed in error reduction by the randomized block design. Randomized block
designs do not make any explicit assumptions about relationships between the nuisance vari-
ables (covariates) and the response. Generally, a randomized block design will have fewer
degrees if freedom for error than a covariance model but the resulting loss of statistical
power is usually quite small. 
15.3.2
Computer Solution
Several computer software packages now available can perform the analysis of covariance.
The output from the Minitab General Linear Models procedure for the data in Example 15.4
is shown in Table 15.15. This output is very similar to those presented previously. In the
section of the output entitled “Analysis of Variance,” the “Seq SS” correspond to a “sequen-
tial” partitioning of the overall model sum of squares, say
whereas the “Adj SS” corresponds to the “extra” sum of squares for each factor, that is,
and
Note that SS (MachineƒDiameter) is the correct sum of squares to use for testing for no
machine effect, and SS (DiameterƒMachine) is the correct sum of squares to use for testing the
hypothesis that 0. The test statistics in Table 15.15 differ slightly from those computed
manually because of rounding.
The program also computes the adjusted treatment means from Equation 15.31
(Minitab refers to those as least squares means on the sample output) and the standard errors.
SS (DiameterMachine) 178.01
SS (MachineDiameter) 13.28
 318.41
 305.13 13.28
SS (Model) SS (Diameter) SS (MachineDiameter)
■TA B L E 1 5 . 1 4
Incorrect Analysis of the Breaking Strength Data as a Single-Factor Experiment
Source of
Sum of 
Degrees of
Mean 
Variation
Squares
Freedom
Square
F0
P-Value
Machines
140.40
2
70.20
4.09
0.0442
Error
206.00
12
17.17
Total
346.40
14 
