15.1.2
The Generalized Linear Model
Data transformations are often a very effective way to deal with the problem of nonnormal
responses and the associated inequality of variance. As we have seen in the previous section,
the Box–Cox method is an easy and effective way to select the form of the transformation.
However, the use of a data transformation poses some problems.
One problem is that the experimenter may be uncomfortable in working with the
response in the transformed scale. That is, he or she is interested in the number of defects, not
the square root of the number of defects, or in resistivity instead of the logarithm of resistivity.
On the other hand, if a transformation is really successful and improves the analysis and the
associated model for the response, experimenters will usually quickly adopt the new metric.
A more serious problem is that a transformation can result in a nonsensical value for
the response variable over some portion of the design factor space that is of interest to the
experimenter. For example, suppose that we have used the square root transformation in an
experiment involving the number of defects observed on semiconductor wafers, and for some
portion of the region of interest the predicted square root of the count of defects is negative.
This is likely to occur for situations where the actual number of defects observed is small.
Consequently, the model for the experiment has produced an obviously unreliable prediction
in the very region where we would like this model to have good predictive performance.
Finally, as noted in Section 15.1.1, we often use transformations to stabilize variance,
induce normality, and simplify the model. There is no assurance that a transformation will
effectively accomplish all of these objectives simultaneously.
An alternative to the typical approach of data transformation followed by standard least
squares analysis of the transformed response is to use the generalized linear model (GLM).
This is an approach developed by Nelder and Wedderburn (1972) that essentially unies lin-
ear and nonlinear models with both normal and nonnormal responses. McCullagh and Nelder
(1989) and Myers, Montgomery,Vining and Robinson (2010) give comprehensive presentations
of generalized linear models, and Myers and Montgomery (1997) provide a tutorial. More
details are also given in the supplemental text material for this chapter. We will provide an
overview of the concepts and illustrate them with three short examples.
A generalized linear model is basically a regression model (an experimental design
model is also a regression model). Like all regression models, it is made up of a random
15.1 Nonnormal Responses and Transformations
645
3.58
7.76
11.95
16.14
20.32
–3
–2
–1
0
Lambda
Ln (Residual SS)
Box–Cox plot power transforms
1
2
3
Design-Expert plot
Peak discharge
Lambda
current =1
Best = 0.541377
Low C.I. = 0.291092
High C.l. = 0.791662
Recommend
  transformation
Square Root
  (Lambda = 0.5)
■F I G U R E 1 5 . 2
Output from Design-Expert for the
Box–Cox procedure
