646
Chapter 15 έΨιOther Design and Analysis Topics
component (what we have usually called the error term) and a function of the design factors
(the xέΑβs) and some unknown parameters (the ΌΑΒέΑβs). In a standard normal-theory linear regres-
sion model, we write
(15.3)
where the error term ΌΑΗis assumed to have a normal distribution with mean zero and constant
variance, and the mean of the response variable y is
(15.4)
The portion xΌΑΧΌΑΒof Equation (15.4) is called the linear predictor. The generalized linear
model contains Equation (15.3) as a special case.
In a GLM, the response variable can have any distribution that is a member of the expo-
nential family. This family includes the normal, Poisson, binomial, exponential, and gamma
distributions, so the exponential family is a very rich and ΌΒςexible collection of distributions
applicable to many experimental situations. Also, the relationship between the response mean ΌΑΔ
and the linear predictor xΌΑΧΌΑΒis determined by a link function.
(15.5)
The regression model that represents the mean response is then given by
(15.6)
For example, the link function leading to the ordinary linear regression model in Equation 15.3
is called the identity link because ΌΑΔΌΑΔgΌΑΑ1(xΌΑΧΌΑΒ) ΌΑΔxΌΑΧΌΑΒ. As another example, the log link
(15.7)
produces the model
(15.8)
The log link is often used with count data (Poisson response) and with continuous responses
that have a distribution that has a long tail to the right (the exponential or gamma distribu-
tion). Another important link function used with binomial data is the logit link
(15.9)
This choice of link function leads to the model
(15.10)
Many choices of link function are possible, but it must always be monotonic and differen-
tiable. Also, note that in a generalized linear model, the variance of the response variable does
not have to be a constant; it can be a function of the mean (and the predictor variables through
the link function). For example, if the response is Poisson, the variance of the response is
exactly equal to the mean.
To use a generalized linear model in practice, the experimenter must specify a response
distribution and a link function. Then the model ΌΒσtting or parameter estimation is done by the
method of maximum likelihood, which for the exponential family turns out to be an iterative
version of weighted least squares. For ordinary linear regression or experimental design mod-
els with a normal response variable, this reduces to standard least squares. Using an approach
that is analogous to the analysis of variance for normal-theory data, we can perform inference
and diagnostic checking for a GLM. Refer to Myers and Montgomery (1997) and Myers,
Montgomery, Vining and Robinson (2010) for the details and examples. Two software pack-
ages that support the generalized linear model nicely are SAS (PROC GENMOD) and JMP.
ΌΑΔΌΑΔ
1
1 ΌΑΕeΌΑΑxΌΑΘ&
ln ΌΑΔ
ΌΑΔ
1 ΌΑΑΌΑΔΌΑΕΌΑΔxΌΑΧ&
ΌΑΔΌΑΔexΌΑΘ&
ln(ΌΑΔ) ΌΑΔxΌΑΧ&
E(y) ΌΑΔΌΑΔΌΑΔgΌΑΑ1(xΌΑΧ&)
g(ΌΑΔ) ΌΑΔxΌΑΧ&
E(y) ΌΑΔΌΑΔΌΑΔΌΑΒ0 ΌΑΕΌΑΒ1x1 ΌΑΕΌΑΒ2x2 ΌΑΕ├Β ΌΑΕΌΑΒkxk ΌΑΔxΌΑΧ&
y ΌΑΔΌΑΒ0 ΌΑΕΌΑΒ1x1 ΌΑΕΌΑΒ2x2 ΌΑΕ├Β ΌΑΕΌΑΒkxk ΌΑΕΌΑΗ
