626
Chapter 14 ■Nested and Split-Plot Designs
as in the tensile strength problem described above. Alternatively, we sometimes nd that com-
plete randomization is not feasible because it is more difcult to change the levels of some
factors than others. The hard-to-vary factors form the whole plots whereas the easy-to-vary
factors are run in the subplots. The review paper by Jones and Nachtsheim (2009) is an excel-
lent source of information and key references on split-plot designs.
In principle, we must carefully consider how the experiment must be conducted and
incorporate all restrictions on randomization into the analysis. We illustrate this point using a
modication of the eye focus time experiment in Chapter 6. Suppose there are only two fac-
tors: visual acuity (A) and illumination level (B). A factorial experiment with a levels of
acuity, b levels of illumination, and n replicates would require that all abn observations be
taken in random order. However, in the test apparatus, it is fairly difcult to adjust these two
factors to different levels, so the experimenter decides to obtain the n replicates by adjusting
the device to one of the a acuities and one of the b illumination levels and running all n obser-
vations at once. In the factorial design, the error actually represents the scatter or noise in the
system plus the ability of the subject to reproduce the same focus time. The model for the fac-
torial design could be written as
(14.17)
where ijk represents the scatter or noise in the system that results from “experimental
error” (that is, our failure to duplicate exactly the same levels of acuity and illumination on
different runs, variability in environmental conditions, and the like), and ijk represents the
“reproducibility error” of the subject. Usually, we combine these components into one
overall error term, say ijk ijk ijk. Assume that V(ijk) 2 
. Now, in the
factorial design, the error mean square has expectation 2 
, with ab(n 1)
degrees of freedom.
If we restrict the randomization as in the second design above, then the “error” mean
square in the analysis of variance provides an estimate of the “reproducibility error”
with
ab(n 1) degrees of freedom, but it yields no information on the “experimental error”
.
Thus, the mean square for error in this second design is too small; consequently, we will
wrongly reject the null hypothesis very frequently. As pointed out by John (1971), this design
is similar to a split-plot design with ab whole plots, each divided into n subplots, and no sub-
treatment. The situation is also similar to subsampling, as described by Ostle (1963).
Assuming that A and B are xed, we nd that the expected mean squares in this case are
(14.18)
Thus, there are no tests on the main effects unless interaction is negligible. The situation is
exactly that of a two-way analysis of variance with one observation per cell. If both factors
are random, then the main effects may be tested against the AB interaction. If only one factor
is random, then the xed factor can be tested against the AB interaction.
E(MSE) 2

E(MSAB) 2
n2

n  ()2
ij
(a 1)(b 1)
E(MSB) 2
n2

an 2
j
b 1
E(MSA) 2
n2
bn 2
i
a 1
2

2

2
2

2
2

yijk i j ()ij ijk ijk 
i 1, 2, . . . , a
j 1, 2, . . . , b
k 1, 2, . . . , n
