15.1
Nonnormal Responses and Transformations
15.1.1
Selecting a Transformation: The Box–Cox Method
In Section 3.4.3, we discussed the problem of nonconstant variance in the response variable
y from a designed experiment and noted that this is a departure from the standard analysis of
variance assumptions. This inequality of variance problem occurs relatively often in practice,
often in conjunction with a nonnormal response variable. Examples would include a count of
defects or particles, proportion data such as yield or fraction defective, or a response variable
that follows some skewed distribution (one “tail” of the response distribution is longer than
the other). We introduced transformation of the response variable as an appropriate method
for stabilizing the variance of the response. Two methods for selecting the form of the trans-
formation were discussed—an empirical graphical technique and essentially trial and error in
which the experimenter simply tries one or more transformations, selecting the one that pro-
duces the most satisfactory or pleasing plot of residuals versus the tted response.
Generally, transformations are used for three purposes: stabilizing response variance,
making the distribution of the response variable closer to the normal distribution, and improv-
ing the t of the model to the data. This last objective could include model simplication, say
by eliminating interaction terms. Sometimes a transformation will be reasonably effective in
simultaneously accomplishing more than one of these objectives.
We have noted that the power family of transformations y* yis very useful, where
is the parameter of the transformation to be determined (e.g., 
means use the square
root of the original response). Box and Cox (1964) have shown how the transformation
parameter may be estimated simultaneously with the other model parameters (overall mean
and treatment effects). The theory underlying their method uses the method of maximum like-
lihood. The actual computational procedure consists of performing, for various values of , a
standard analysis of variance on
(15.1)
where
ln1[(1/n) ln y] is the geometric mean of the observations. The maximum like-
lihood estimate of is the value for which the error sum of squares, say SSE(), is a mini-
mum. This value of is usually found by plotting a graph of SSE() versus and then read-
ing the value of that minimizes SSE() from the graph. Usually between 10 and 20 values
of are sufcient for estimating the optimum value. A second iteration using a ner mesh of
values can be performed if a more accurate estimate of is necessary.
Notice that we cannot select the value of by directly comparing the error sums of
squares from analysis of variance on ybecause for each value of , the error sum of squares
is measured on a different scale. Furthermore, a problem arises in y when 0, namely, as
approaches zero, yapproaches unity. That is, when 0, all the response values are a con-
stant. The component (y1)/of Equation 15.1 alleviates this problem because as tends
to zero, (y1)/goes to a limit of ln y. The divisor component 
1 in Equation 15.1
rescales the responses so that the error sums of squares are directly comparable.
In using the Box–Cox method, we recommend that the experimenter use simple choic-
es for because the practical difference between 0.5 and 0.58 is likely to be small,
but the square root transformation (0.5) is much easier to interpret. Obviously, values of
close to unity would suggest that no transformation is necessary.
Once a value of is selected by the Box–Cox method, the experimenter can analyze
the data using yas the response unless of course 0, in which case he can use ln y. It is
perfectly acceptable to use y() as the actual response, although the model parameter estimates
y˙
y˙
y() 
y 1
y˙ 1
y˙ ln y
 Z 0
 0
1
2
15.1 Nonnormal Responses and Transformations
643
