Now MSE estimates 2, the variance of yijk, an individual observation. However, we have done
an analysis of variance on the cell averages, and because the variance of the average in the
ijth cell is 2/nij, the error mean square actually used in the analysis of variance should be an
estimate of the average variance of the 
, say
(15.13)
Using MSE from Equation 15.12 to estimate 2 in Equation 15.13, we obtain
(15.14)
as the error mean square (with n.. ab degrees of freedom) to use in the analysis of variance.
The method of unweighted means is an approximate procedure because the sums of
squares for rows, columns, and interaction are not distributed as chi-square random variables.
The primary advantage of the method seems to be its computational simplicity. When the nij
are not dramatically different, the method of unweighted means often works reasonably well.
A related technique is the weighted squares of means method, also proposed by Yates
(1934). This technique is also based on the sums of squares of the cell means, but the terms
in the sums of squares are weighted in inverse proportion to their variances. For further details
of the procedure, see Searle (1971a) and Speed, Hocking, and Hackney (1978).
15.2.3
The Exact Method
In situations where approximate methods are inappropriate, such as when empty cells occur
(some nij 0) or when the nij are dramatically different, the experimenter must use an exact
analysis. The approach used to develop sums of squares for testing main effects and interac-
tions is to represent the analysis of variance model as a regression model, t that model to
the data, and use the general regression signicance test approach. However, this may be done
in several ways, and these methods may result in different values for the sums of squares.
Furthermore, the hypotheses that are being tested are not always direct analogs of those for
the balanced case, nor are they always easily interpretable. For further reading on the subject,
see the supplemental text material for this chapter. Other good references are Searle (1971a);
Hocking and Speed (1975); Hocking, Hackney, and Speed (1978); Speed, Hocking, and
Hackney (1978); Searle, Speed, and Henderson (1981); Milliken and Johnson (1984); and
Searle (1987). The SAS system of statistical software provides an excellent approach to the
analysis of unbalanced data through PROC GLM.
15.3
The Analysis of Covariance
In Chapters 2 and 4, we introduced the use of the blocking principle to improve the preci-
sion with which comparisons between treatments are made. The paired t-test was the proce-
dure illustrated in Chapter 2, and the randomized block design was presented in Chapter 4.
In general, the blocking principle can be used to eliminate the effect of controllable nui-
sance factors. The analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) is another technique that is occasion-
ally useful for improving the precision of an experiment. Suppose that in an experiment with
a response variable y there is another variable, say x, and that y is linearly related to x.
Furthermore, suppose that x cannot be controlled by the experimenter but can be observed
along with y. The variable x is called a covariate or concomitant variable. The analysis of
covariance involves adjusting the observed response variable for the effect of the concomitant
MSE MSE
ab 
a
i1 
b
j1
1
nij
V(yij.) 

a
i1 
b
j1
2/nij
ab
2
ab 
a
i1 
b
j1
1
nij
yij.
15.3 The Analysis of Covariance
655
