652
Chapter 15 ■Other Design and Analysis Topics
Generalized linear models have found extensive application in biomedical and phar-
maceutical research and development. As more software packages incorporate this capabil-
ity, it will nd widespread application in the general industrial research and development
environment. The examples in this section used standard experimental designs in conjuction
with a response distribution from the exponential family. When the experimenter knows in
advance that a GLM analysis will be required it is possible to design the experiment with
this in mind. Optimal designs for GLMs are a special type of optimal design for a nonlinear
model. For more discussion and examples, see Johnson and Montgomery (2009) (2010).
15.2
Unbalanced Data in a Factorial Design
The primary focus of this book has been the analysis of balanced factorial designs—that is,
cases where there are an equal number of observations n in each cell. However, it is not unusual
to encounter situations where the number of observations in the cells is unequal. These unbal-
anced factorial designs occur for various reasons. For example, the experimenter may have
designed a balanced experiment initially, but because of unforeseen problems in running the
experiment, resulting in the loss of some observations, he or she ends up with unbalanced data.
On the other hand, some unbalanced experiments are deliberately designed that way. For
instance, certain treatment combinations may be more expensive or more difcult to run than
others, so fewer observations may be taken in those cells. Alternatively, some treatment combi-
nations may be of greater interest to the experimenter because they represent new or unexplored
conditions, and so the experimenter may elect to obtain additional replication in those cells.
The orthogonality property of main effects and interactions present in balanced data
does not carry over to the unbalanced case. This means that the usual analysis of variance
techniques do not apply. Consequently, the analysis of unbalanced factorials is much more
difcult than that for balanced designs.
In this section, we give a brief overview of methods for dealing with unbalanced fac-
torials, concentrating on the case of the two-factor xed effects model. Suppose that the
number of observations in the ijth cell is nij. Furthermore, let ni.  
nij be the number of
observations in the ith row (the ith level of factor A), n.j 
nij be the number of obser-
vations in the jth column (the jth level of factor B), and n..  
nij be the total num-
ber of observations.
15.2.1
Proportional Data: An Easy Case
One situation involving unbalanced data presents little difculty in analysis; this is the case
of proportional data. That is, the number of observations in the ijth cell is
(15.11)
This condition implies that the number of observations in any two rows or columns is propor-
tional. When proportional data occur, the standard analysis of variance can be employed.
Only minor modications are required in the manual computing formulas for the sums of
squares, which become
SSA 
a
i1
y2
i..
ni. y2
...
n..
SST 
a
i1 
b
j1 
nij
k1
y2
ijk y2
...
n..
nij 
ni.n.j
n..
"a
i1 "b
j1
a
i1
"b
j1
