590
Chapter 13 ÔľáExperiments with Random Factors
represented by the sum of squares of the model components associated with that fac-
tor divided by its degrees of freedom. In our example, the ţüęxed effect for A is
Rule 6. Expected Mean Squares.
There is an expected mean square for each model com-
ponent. The expected mean square for error is E(MSE) ţÇâţÇÇ2. In the case of the restrict-
ed model, for every other model term, the expected mean square contains ţÇÇ2 plus either
the variance component or the ţüęxed effect component for that term, plus those compo-
nents for all other model terms that contain the effect in question and that involve no
interactions with other ţüęxed effects. The coefţüęcient of each variance component or ţüęxed
effect is the number of observations at each distinct value of that component.
To illustrate for the case of the two-factor ţüęxed effects model, consider ţüęnding the inter-
action expected mean square, E(MSAB). The expected mean square will contain only the ţüęxed
effect for the AB interaction (because no other model terms contain AB) plus ţÇÇ2, and the ţüęxed
effect for AB will be multiplied by n because there are n observations at each distinct value
of the interaction component (the n observations in each cell). Thus, the expected mean
square for AB is
As another illustration of the two-factor ţüęxed effects model, the expected mean square for the
main effect of A would be
The multiplier in the numerator is bn because there are bn observations at each level of A. The
AB interaction term is not included in the expected mean square because while it does include
the effect in question (A), factor B is a ţüęxed effect.
To illustrate how Rule 6 applies to a model with random effects, consider the two-
factor random model. The expected mean square for the AB interaction would be
and the expected mean square for the main effect of A would be
Note that the variance component for the AB interaction term is included because A is includ-
ed in AB and B is a random effect.
Now consider the restricted form of the two-factor mixed model. Once again, the
expected mean square for the AB interaction term is
For the main effect of A, the ţüęxed factor, the expected mean square is
The interaction variance component is included because A is included in AB and B is a ran-
dom effect. For the main effect of B, the expected mean square is
E(MSB) ţÇâţÇÇ2 ţÇäanţÇÇ2
ţÇü
E(MSA) ţÇâţÇÇ2 ţÇänţÇÇ2
ţÇŹţÇüţÇä
bn ţÇé
a
iţÇâ1
ţÇŹ2
i
a ţÇÇ1
E(MSAB) ţÇâţÇÇ2 ţÇänţÇÇ2
ţÇŹţÇü
E(MSA) ţÇâţÇÇ2 ţÇänţÇÇ2
ţÇŹţÇüţÇäbnţÇÇ2
ţÇŹ
E(MSAB) ţÇâţÇÇ2 ţÇänţÇÇ2
ţÇŹţÇü
E(MSA) ţÇâţÇÇ2 ţÇä
bn ţÇé
a
iţÇâ1
ţÇŹ2
i
(a ţÇÇ1)
E(MSAB) ţÇâţÇÇ2 ţÇä
n ţÇé
a
iţÇâ1 ţÇé
b
jţÇâ1
 (ţÇŹţÇü)2
ij
(a ţÇÇ1)(b ţÇÇ1)
ţÇé
a
iţÇâ1
ţÇŹ2
i
a ţÇÇ1
