668
Chapter 15 ■Other Design and Analysis Topics
Imposing the assumption that the covariate affects the response variable identically
across all treatment combinations, an analysis of covariance table similar to the procedure
given in Section 15.3.1 could be performed. The only difference would be the treatment sum
of squares. For a 22 factorial with n replicates, the treatment sum of squares (Tyy) would be
(1/n) 
. This quantity is the sum of the sums of squares for factors A,
B, and the AB interaction. The adjusted treatment sum of squares could then be partitioned
into individual effect components, that is, adjusted main effects sum of squares SSA and SSB,
and an adjusted interaction sum of squares, SSAB.
The amount of replication is a key issue when broadening the design structure of the
treatments. Consider a 23 factorial arrangement. A minimum of two replicates is needed to
evaluate all treatment combinations with a separate covariate for each treatment combination
(covariate by treatment interaction). This is equivalent to tting a simple regression model to
each treatment combination or design cell. With two observations per cell, one degree of
freedom is used to estimate the intercept (the treatment effect), and the other is used to esti-
mate the slope (the covariate effect). With this saturated model, no degrees of freedom are avail-
able to estimate the error. Thus, at least three replicates are needed for a complete analysis of
covariance, assuming the most general case. This problem becomes more pronounced as the
number of distinct design cells (treatment combinations) and covariates increases.
If the amount of replication is limited, various assumptions can be made to allow some
useful analysis. The simplest assumption (and typically the worst) that can be made is that the
covariate has no effect. If the covariate is erroneously not considered, the entire analysis and
subsequent conclusions could be dramatically in error. Another choice is to assume that there
is no treatment by covariate interaction. Even if this assumption is incorrect, the average
affect of the covariate across all treatments will still increase the precision of the estimation
and testing of the treatment effects. One disadvantage of this assumption is that if several
treatment levels interact with the covariate, the various terms may cancel one another out and
the covariate term, if estimated alone with no interaction, may be insignicant. A third choice
would be to assume some of the factors (such as some two-factor and higher interactions) are
insignicant. This allows some degrees of freedom to be used to estimate error. This course
of action, however, should be undertaken carefully and the subsequent models evaluated thor-
oughly because the estimation of error will be relatively imprecise unless enough degrees of
freedom are allocated for it. With two replicates, each of these assumptions will free some
degrees of freedom to estimate error and allow useful hypothesis tests to be performed. Which
assumption to enforce should be dictated by the experimental situation and how much risk the
experimenter is willing to assume. We caution that in the effects model-building strategy if a
treatment factor is eliminated, then the resulting two “replicates” of each original 23 are not
truly replicates. These “hidden replicates” do free 1 degrees of freedom for parameter esti-
mation but should not be used as replicates to estimate pure error because the execution of the
original design may not have been randomized that way.
To illustrate some of these ideas, consider the 23 factorial design with two replicates and
a covariate shown in Table 15.16. If the response variable y is analyzed without accounting
for the covariate, the following model results:
The overall model is signicant at the 0.01 level with R2 0.786 and MSE 470.82.
The residual analysis indicates no problem with this model except the observation with y 
103.01 is unusual.
If the second assumption, common slopes with no treatment by covariate interaction, is
chosen, the full effects model and the covariate effect can be estimated. The JMP output  is shown
in Table 15.17. Notice that the MSE has been reduced considerably by considering the covariate.
The nal resulting analysis after sequentially removing each nonsignicant interaction and the
yˆ 25.03 11.20A 18.05B 7.24C 18.91AB 14.80AC
y2
ij. y2
.../(2)(2)n
"2
i1 "2
j1
