592
Chapter 13 ■Experiments with Random Factors
13.6
Approximate F Tests
In factorial experiments with three or more factors involving a random or mixed model and
certain other, more complex designs, there are frequently no exact test statistics for certain
effects in the models. One possible solution to this dilemma is to assume that certain interac-
tions are negligible. To illustrate, if we could reasonably assume that all the two-factor inter-
actions in Example 13.5 are negligible, then we could set 
, and tests
for main effects could be conducted.
Although this seems to be an attractive possibility, we must point out that there must be
something in the nature of the process—or some strong prior knowledge—for us to assume
that one or more of the interactions are negligible. In general, this assumption is not easily
made, nor should it be taken lightly. We should not eliminate certain interactions from the
model without conclusive evidence that it is appropriate to do so. A procedure advocated by
some experimenters is to test the interactions rst, then set at zero those interactions found to
be insignicant, and then assume that these interactions are zero when testing other effects in
the same experiment. Although sometimes done in practice, this procedure can be dangerous
because any decision regarding an interaction is subject to both type I and type II errors.
A variation of this idea is to pool certain mean squares in the analysis of variance to
obtain an estimate of error with more degrees of freedom. For instance, suppose that in
Example 13.6 the test statistic F0 MSABC/MSE was not signicant. Thus, H0:
0 is
not rejected, and both MSABC and MSE estimate the error variance 2. The experi-
menter might consider pooling or combining MSABC and MSE according to
so that E(MSE) 2. Note that MSEhas abc(n 1) (a 1)(b 1)(c 1) degrees of
freedom, compared to abc(n 1) degrees of freedom for the original MSE.
The danger of pooling is that one may make a type II error and combine the mean
square for a factor that really is signicant with error, thus obtaining a new residual mean
square (MSE) that is too large. This will make other signicant effects more difcult to detect.
On the contrary, if the original error mean square has a very small number of degrees of free-
dom (e.g., less than six), the experimenter may have much to gain by pooling because it could
potentially increase the precision of further tests considerably. A reasonably practical proce-
dure is as follows. If the original error mean square has six or more degrees of freedom, do
not pool. If the original error mean square has fewer than six degrees of freedom, pool only
if the F statistic for the mean square to be pooled is not signicant at a large value of , such
as 0.25.
If we cannot assume that certain interactions are negligible and we still need to make
inferences about those effects for which exact tests do not exist, a procedure attributed to
Satterthwaite (1946) can be employed. Satterthwaite’s method uses linear combinations of
mean squares, for example,
(13.17)
and
(13.18)
where the mean squares in Equations 13.31 and 13.32 are chosen so that E(MS) E(MS)
is equal to a multiple of the effect (the model parameter or variance component) considered
in the null hypothesis. Then the test statistic would be
(13.19)
F MS
MS
MSMSu Á MSv
MSMSr Á MSs
MSEabc(n 1)MSE (a 1)(b 1)(c 1)MSABC
abc(n 1) (a 1)(b 1)(c 1)
2

2
0
2
2

