E X A M P L E 1 4 . 3
The factors affecting uniformity in a single-wafer plasma
etching process are being investigated. Three factors on the
etching tool are relatively difcult to change from run to
run: A electrode gap, B gas ow, and C pressure.
Two other factors are easy to change from run to run: D 
time and E RF (radio frequency) power. The experi-
menters want to use a fractional factorial experiment to
investigate these ve factors because the number of test
wafers available is limited. The hard-to-change factors also
indicate that a split-plot design should be considered. The
experimenters decide to use the strategy discussed above: a
251 design with factors A, B, and C in the whole plots and
factors D and E in the subplots. The design generator is E 
ABCD. This produces a 16-run fractional factorial with
eight whole plots. Every whole plot contains one of the eight
treatment combinations from a complete 23 factorial design
in factors A, B, and C. Each whole plot is divided into two
subplots, with one of the treatment combinations for factors
D and E in each subplot. The design and the resulting uni-
formity data are shown in Table 14.22. The eight whole
plots were run in random order, but once a whole plot con-
guration for factors A, B, and C was set up on the etching
tool, both subplot runs were made (also in random order).
The statistical analysis of this experiment involves keep-
ing the whole-plot and subplot factors separate. We assume
that all interactions beyond order two are negligible. Table
14.23 lists the effect estimates separated into whole-plot and
subplot terms. Furthermore, available degrees of freedom
are used to estimate effects, so we cannot estimate either the
whole-plot or the subplot error. Therefore, we must use
14.5 Other Variations of the Split-Plot Design
629
to change and that the other two factors D and E are easy to change. For example, it might be
necessary to rst manufacture the springs by varying factors A, B, and C, and then hold those
factors xed while varying factors D and E in a subsequent experiment.
We consider a modication of that experiment because the original experimenters may
not have run it as a split plot and because they did not use the design generator that we are
going to use. Let the whole-plot factors be denoted by A, B, and C and the split-plot factors
be denoted by D and E (the bold symbol is used to help us identify the easy-to-change fac-
tors). We will select the design generator E ABCD. The layout of this design has eight
whole plots (the eight combinations of factors A, B, and C each at two levels). Each whole
plot is divided into two subplots, and a combination of the factors D and E are tested in each
split plot. (The exact treatment combinations depend on the signs on the treatment combina-
tions for the whole-plot factors through the generator.)
Assume that all three-, four-, and ve-factor interactions are negligible. If this assump-
tion is reasonable, then all whole-plot factors A, B, and C and their two-factor interactions can
be estimated in the whole plot . If the design is replicated, these effects would be tested against
the whole-plot error. Alternatively, if the design is unreplicated, their effects could be assessed
via a normal probability plot (or possibly by Lenth’s method). The subplot factors D and E and
their two-factor interaction DE can also be estimated. However, since DE ABC, the DE
interaction needs to be treated as a whole-plot term. There are six two-factor interactions of
whole-plot and split-plot factors that can also be estimated: AD, AE, BD, BE, CD, and CE. In
general, it turns out that any split-plot main effect or interaction that is aliased with whole-plot
main effects or interactions involving only whole-plot factors would be compared to the whole-
plot error. Furthermore, split-plot main effects or interactions involving at least one split-plot
factor that are not aliased with whole-plot main effects or interactions involving only whole-
plot factors are compared to the split-plot error. See Bisgaard (2000) for a thorough discussion.
Therefore, in our problem, all of the effects D, E, AD, AE, BD, BE, CD, and CE are compared
to the split-plot error. Alternatively, they could be assessed via a normal probability plot.
Recently, several papers have appeared on the subject of fractional factorials and
response surface experiments in split plots. The papers by Vining, Kowalski and Montgomery
(2005), Vining and Kowalski (2008), Macharia and Goos (2010), Bisgaard (2000), Bingham
and Sitter (1999), Huang, Chen, and Voelkel (1999), and Almimi, Kulahci and Montgomery
(2008a)(2008b)(2009) are recommended.
